#
Editorial: Hawke’s Bay Herald 29 December 1898.
In yesterday's issue, and on the authority of a London correspondent, we stated that the Rev. W. Colenso had been elected an honorary member of the “Royal Geographical Society.” The honor conferred on Mr Colenso, it seems, comes from the “Royal Geological Society of Cornwall,” the late English mail having brought Mr Colenso intimation to that effect from the president and honorary secretary of the Cornish society. This society, we may add, stands very high, having the Queen for patron and the Prince of Wales (as Duke of Cornwall) as vice-patron. We congratulate our veteran citizen upon this further recognition of his untiring efforts in the cause of his beloved science. 
#
From our Ormondville correspondent: 	
Hawke’s Bay Herald, 18 January 1899.
Napier’s grand old man, the Rev. W. Colenso, occupied the pulpit at the Ormondville Anglican Church on Sunday morning last, and preached a very interesting sermon of a very orthodox nature. There was a good attendance to listen to his remarks, and the hearing accorded him was most appreciative. During the course of his remarks he took occasion to bestow a well-deserved compliment on the playing of the organist, Mr J. Scholes. 
#
Editorial: Poverty Bay Herald 9 February 1899.
The Rev. W. Colenso, of Napier, has made another gift of £1000 to his native town of Penzance, Cornwall. The sum is to be added to previous gifts, and the interest of the whole is to he shared annually, under the title of “The Colenso Dole.” It is stipulated that the dole shall be open to the poor of all creeds, but Cornishmen are to be preferred, and especially bona fide townsmen of the borough of Penzance, moreover always preferring the unfortunate, struggling, prudent working man, to the unthrifty and lazy and men of drinking habits. The Penzance Borough Council, as evidence of their recognition of Mr Colenso’s liberality towards his native place, unanimously decided to present him with the honorary freedom of that ancient borough.
#
DEATHS: Hawke’s Bay Herald 11 February 1899.
COLENSO.— At Napier, on 10th February, 1899, Rev. William Colenso, F.R.S., F.L.S., in the 88th year of his age. The funeral will leave his late residence tomorrow (Sunday), 12th instant, at 3 o'clock. — W.M. Newman, Undertaker. 
#
Daily Telegraph 11 February 1899

Ode on the death of William Colenso. 
Proud Ocean, circling round New Zealand’s Isle, 
     Mourn in loud murmurs on thy sea-girt strand! 
Ye stars of Heaven, that o’er her gently smile 
’Mid the dark hours of midnight, guard thy land! 
For lo! our teacher and our friend lies sleeping, 
While round his bier a myriad eyes are weeping. 
Ye distant mountains, cloud-wrapt, cold and bleak, 
     Whose rugged heights by man have ne’er been scaled, 
Echo a mourning nation’s loss from peak to peak, 
     As in full years a prophet dies bewailed. 
          And Death! who spares nor age, nor power, nor worth, 
          Claims him her own, and calls him from the earth. 
Wake! long neglected lyre, in measured tones 
     Breathe music to the wind, all soft and sweet, 
As in its onward march it wildly moans, 
     Or softly whispers hope and peace complete.
          Then shall our hearts be soothed, and ’mid the gloom,

		            Shall dream of rest, and life beyond the tomb. 
		  PENLYRIA
		  Repo Kite,
		  Napier, February 11th, 1899.
#
Hawke’s Bay Herald 11 February 1899
THE CLOSE OF AN EVENTFUL LIFE.
DEATH OF THE REV. W. COLENSO.
The Rev. W. Colenso, F.R.S., F.L.S., died early yesterday morning at his residence, Milton-road, his end coming peacefully. At 4 a.m. he called his housekeeper to procure him some refreshment, and when Mrs Anderson returned he seemed to be sleeping. Not wishing to disturb the sleeper, she did not wake him, but subsequently finding that he did not move, she went to his bedside and found him dead. The deceased, who came from an old Cornish family, was born in 1811, and was a first cousin to the late Bishop of Natal. 
In October, 1887, Mr Colenso read a “Jubilee Paper” before the Hawke’s Bay Philosophical Society. This was intended “to commemorate more particularly the completion of the printing of the New Testament in the Maori tongue at Paihia, in the Bay of Islands, in the year 1837—60 years ago—an event that caused a great sensation at the time, both in New Zealand and at Home (although now in part forgotten), and one that was productive of incalculable good to the Maori race; together with the introduction of the printing press into this country; and also the gradual formation of the present written Maori language, with many peculiar and little-known circumstances pertaining to these pre-historic times, and incidental thereto.”	 
In the year 1833, the Church Missionary Society having determined to send out a printing press and type, and all necessary material to the mission in New Zealand, were seeking a missionary printer to be in charge. In the end of that year Mr Colenso, then residing in London, was introduced to the secretaries of that society at their mission house, and engaged to come out to New Zealand with the press as a missionary. In 1834 he left London for Sydney en route to New Zealand, and after a long passage of 17 weeks the vessel arrived at Sydney. At that time there were only three clergymen of the Church of England residing in all Australia—two of them (the Revs. Messrs Cowper and Hill) in Sydney, and the Rev. S. Marsden at Parramatta. As no vessel could be found willing to leave for New Zealand, owing to fear of the Maoris, Mr Colenso was obliged to remain eight or nine weeks at Sydney. At last, after much entreaty, a small schooner of 67 tons was got ready, and he sailed on the 10th December for the Bay of Islands. After a long and eventful voyage of 20 days (suffering much from want of water, as well as from a complication of peculiar miseries), he landed at Paihia mission station in the Bay of Islands on December 30th, and in the following few days got the press, type, &c., safely on shore. 
At this time there were three missionaries with their wives and families living at Paihia—the Rev. H. Williams, the Rev. W. Williams, and Mr C. Baker. On the 17th February, 1835, Mr Colenso pulled proofs of the first book printed in New Zealand, the printing office being filled with spectators to witness the performance. The printing of the New Testament, consisting of 356 pages, was accomplished by the middle of December, 1837—naturally a cause of great rejoicing with Mr Colenso, who relates that many remarkable incidents happened at this time, showing the extreme value placed by the Christian and well-disposed Maori chiefs on the sacred volume. The powerful chiefs of Kaitaia (near Ahipara and the North Cape), Panakareao, wrote to Mr Colenso for a single copy; and in order that it should arrive the more dignified, he sent it all the way by a special messenger (a long journey of several days through a wild and little known dense untravelled forest), and with it he sent Mr Colenso one pound in gold for payment, strictly limiting his request to one copy only. It was the first sovereign Mr Colenso ever saw with a Maori or in this country, and the letter and the gold were well secured, being wrapped up in folds of cloth, and bound and worn turban fashion night and day on his head. As not many of the principal Maori chiefs or their sons could then write, many of them travelled on foot and barefooted to Paihia, from very great distances, to obtain a copy, at the same time running no small risks in their doing so, owing to the unsettled unavenged old feuds which still existed. Several distinguished early foreign visitors also got single copies by asking—as the Bishop of Australia, Admiral du Petit Thouars, of the French navy, Captains P.P. King and Harding, of the British navy, Commodore Wilkes, of the American exploring expedition, and others. 
In 1842 the Bishop of New Zealand, Dr. Selwyn, arrived, accompanied by his chaplain, Rev. W.C. Cotton and others, and in the following year a printer having arrived at Paihia from the Society in England to take charge of the mission press, Mr Colenso went to reside with them at St. John’s College, Te Waimate. On Mr Colenso’s coming to reside in Hawke’s Bay in 1844 he brought with him a small Albion press and types which he again found to be of great service, though having a people scattered over a very large district to attend to, with its consequent heavy travelling on foot, there being then no roads, he could not use his little press so much as he wished. The deceased was at one time Inspector of Schools in Napier; and was also Treasurer for Hawke’s Bay in the Provincial Government days. He was the first member for Napier in the General Assembly, which sat in Auckland in 1861. 
Mr Colenso was on several occasions president of the Hawke’s Bay Philosophical Society, before which institute he read many valuable papers on scientific matters. His portrait graces the museum of that institute, to remind the visitor of a life which bound together the 
past and the present generations. In Mr Colenso’s death a lone and solitary figure has passed away. He had dipped deep into the volume of Nature, had plucked secrets from her bosom which the future inhabitant of this country will value far above the passing profit of the moment, and which but for his keen perception, his acumen, would have been buried. The future historian, when examining into the earlier records of this country, will find in the traces left by this veteran, the most ample information as to all that was remarkable and characteristic in the peculiar period when Europeans first set their feet on Maori soil. On the verge of a new century he has gone, the labors of nearly a century to mark his passage. To the last moment he was busily engaged in preserving that which would keep the period in which he lived and moved in prominence in future years. 	

To quote his farewell words to the Hawke’s Bay Philosophical Institute:— “I, as an aged minister of religion, and a fervent disciple of Nature, and with increasing convictions of the truth (soon by me to be realised), would say one word more to my audience re our talents and our time here; that as you sow now, you will reap hereafter. Young friends, don’t waste time; don’t abuse talents; seek to make the best use of both. Our bodies will remain, but our minds will go with us. And in a few beautiful and expressive lines of our classical English poet, Thomson—already quoted from 
by me—I close—
     Father of light and life! thou good supreme 	
     O, teach me what is good! teach me Thyself! 	
     Save me from folly, vanity, and vice, 	
     From every low pursuit! and feed my soul 	
     With knowledge, conscious peace, and virtue pure. 	
     Sacred, substantial, never fading bliss. 
#
Hawke’s Bay Herald 13 February 1899.
THE LATE MR COLENSO
The funeral of the late Rev. William Colenso took place yesterday afternoon, and was attended by a very large number of settlers from all parts of the district. Amongst the wreaths sent was one from the congregation of the parish in Woodville, where Mr Colenso often preached, in token of loving remembrance. The service at the graveside was impressively conducted by Dean Hovell, assisted by the Bishop of Waiapu. 
The Rev. T.A. Cato, preaching at the Cathedral last night from the text “It is finished,” made feeling reference to the death of the late Rev. William Colenso, and said that he felt sure the people of Napier, especially the poor, would greatly miss the many benevolent actions of the deceased gentleman. He referred to Mr Colenso as an early pioneer of the colony, and one who had gone through many trials and vicissitudes, with exemplary patience and forbearance. The choir, after the sermon, sang the hymn “Days and moments swiftly flying,” and at the conclusion of the service Mr Sharp played the “Dead March” from “Saul,” the choir and congregation remaining standing.
Messrs C.H. Edwards, E.W. Knowles, and J.B. Fielder are the executors of the will of the late Mr Colenso. The deceased leaves £1000, to be invested by the Mayor and Councillors, and divided annually amongst 20 of the poorest families of Napier. The sum of £500 is bequeathed to the annual purchase of prizes for children attending the State schools in Napier; £500 for poor and distressed seamen or other strangers desiring assistance; and £500 to be invested for the object of assisting discharged prisoners from Napier gaol; £200 to the Hawke’s Bay Philosophical Society, which body also receives all his dried plants, specimens, natural history specimens, framed portrait of Sir J. Hooker and Allan Cunningham, an enlarged photograph of the donor, and a photo of an ancient bronze bell with Tamil inscription, found in New Zealand, all these gifts to be held in trust by Mr S. Hill and Dr. Spencer and Mr J.W. Carlile (the two latter deceased since the signing of the will). The bell referred to goes to the Colonial Museum, Wellington, which also receives a copy of the New Testament in Maori, printed by Mr Colenso at Paihia, Bay of Islands, in 1837; £100 is bequeathed to the Anglican Church, Woodville, to be devoted to the completion of the chancel in memory of Bishop Stuart; his theological works to the Waiapu Diocesan Library, as well as a complete subscriber’s set of the “Transactions of the New Zealand Institute,” and the MSS. of the “Census of the Maori Population of Hawke’s Bay and Neighborhood,” as taken at the request of the Bishop of New Zealand in 1845. The Maori Dictionary manuscripts go to the Government, on certain terms, and the deceased’s scientific books are included in his general estate.
#
Hawke’s Bay Herald 13 February 1899.
A TRIBUTE TO THE VETERAN.
[By H. Hill.]
Yesterday the grave closed over the mortal remains of one who has for many years held a foremost place amongst (us) as a citizen, and as a man of science. The spectacle was an imposiug one, as befitted the occasion. All classes of the people were represented at the funeral, for all were able to show in this way the esteem and respect in which the late Rev. Mr Colenso was held. The scene at the grave side was sad, and withal beautiful. An old man full of years and honors, was borne to his last resting place. Yet no wife, no child, no relative was there to mourn his passing away. But friends and associates and admirers—all classes, all creeds, as well as those of no creed—were there to do honor at his burial to the man who, whilst living loved the poor, the homeless, and the unfortunate and though dead had not forgotten to make “mention of them in his will.” 
His house was known to all the vagrant town, 	
     He chid their wanderings, but relieved their pain, 	
     Careless of their merits or their faults to scan. 	
     His pity gone ere charity began. 
Such was the man of 88 years who, of us all had resided longest in this district and had witnessed the birth of Napier and seen the marvellous changes through which it has passed since the year 1843, when as the first European he came here to do missionary work. He had then resided in New Zealand nine years. Coming to the country as a printer, and imbued with scientific tastes and strong religious convictions, he was not the man to remain idle during the intervals of rest from the printing press. Already his name was known to the motley crowd in the Bay of Islands as an enthusiastic collector of plants, and we find the celebrated Darwin making his acquaintance in 1835 during the voyage of the Beagle; Allan Cunningham, the botanist, in 1837; and Sir Joseph Hooker in 1843. Cunningham died in 1839 at Sydney, but he appears to have made a deep impression upon Mr Colenso, for only in December last a long conversation took place between the writer and Mr Colenso concerning Allan Cunningham, whom Mr Colenso mentioned in loving terms as a noble character and an ardent student of botany. But he was proud of the acquaintance of Allan Cunningham for another reason. Cunningham knew Sir Joseph Banks, the botanist who accompanied Cook in his first voyage to New Zealand, and thus, as he used playfully to remark, he was the link that joined the century gone with the century going. 
The acquaintance made with Sir Joseph Hooker remained unbroken to the last. It was in July 1886 that a letter arrived from Sir Joseph informing Mr Colenso that he had been unanimously chosen for honors by the Royal Society, it being the only occasion on which such an honor had been conferred without a single objection being raised. The Royal Society is supposed to contain none but princes in the world of science, and as is natural, Mr Colenso was proud of the honor conferred upon him. Even so long ago as 1864, when Sir Joseph Hooker was occupied in the preparation of the “Handbook of the New Zealand Flora,” he had written in the preface:— “In every respect Mr Colenso is the foremost New Zealand botanical explorer, and the one to whom I am most indebted for opinions and information.” And he maintained his position to the last. No other man has written so many papers in the “Transactions of the New Zealand Institute” on botany, Maori customs, natural history, and legendary lore, and I believe that one of his botanical papers is now being printed in the Transactions to be issued shortly. Here is an example of steadfastness and diligence, seldom to be found among men, and it is worthy of being held up to the pupils of our local schools, who have also been remembered by this veteran of science in his will. 
Less than a year ago the first portion of his Maori-English Lexicon was issued from the Government printing office. It bears a dedication to his old friend Sir George Grey, who, I believe, was dead before a special presentation copy reached London. For 32 years the Government of this country has been meddling and muddling with the issue of this work, the only result being the printing of the letter A. The manuscript is left in the pigeonholes of the room in which Mr Colenso spent so many years of his active life, to the everlasting disgrace, be it said, of officialdom and mediocrity of mind among those who ought to lead the destiny of our country to better things. But the history of this transaction dealing with the Maori-English lexicon has yet to be told. The last word has certainly not been said on the subject, for the full and complete facts are known and Mr Colenso’s name will yet be vindicated before the world. 
Of his private life it is difficult to write. He hated shams of all kinds, and the new ways of the world, in whatever direction, were to him an abomination. The “boys of yesterday” who came to him were too often repulsed by his pungent remarks on the forwardness and lack of knowledge of the younger generation. He had outlived his own generation, and the new generations, with new thoughts and new ways, were not to his liking. Yet he had a tender and loving heart, and no man was ever more ready to help those in distress, and likewise young children, with many of whom he corresponded until within a few days of his death. As a citizen he has left behind him a good name, worthy of all praise. As a scientific student and collector and as a philologist he has done excellent work for his country such as was needed in the early days of settlement, and his mark has been left on the “sands of time,” for the benefit of other men and other students. When the history of Early New Zealand comes to be written the name of William Colenso, F.R.S., F.L.S., printer, missionary, scientist, philologist, and, best of all, humanitarian, will be found among the list of the honorable roll of men who spent their talents in laying a strong foundation for the future of this land, and who when dying remembered the poor, the outcast, the unfortunate, and the young children in his will, without regard to age, creed, or nationality. 
Lay me low, my work is done; 	
          I am weary, lay me low, 	
     Where the wild flowers woo the sun, 	
          Where the forest breezes blow, 	
     Where the butterfly takes wing, 	
          Where the creepers drooping grow, 	
     Where the wild birds chirp and sing 	
          I am weary, let me go. 
     I have striven hard and long 	
          In the world’s unequal light. 	
     Always to resist the wrong, 	
          Always to maintain the right, 	
     Always with a fearless heart; 	
          Taking, giving blow for blow, 	
     Willie, I have played my part, 	
          And am weary—let me go. 
     Stern the world and bitter cold. 	
          Irksome, painful to endure, 	
     Everywhere a love of gold. 	
          Nowhere pity for the poor, 	
     Everywhere mistrust, disguise, 	
          Pride, hypocrisy, and show, 	
     Draw the curtain, close mine eyes, 	
          I am weary—let me go. 
Such were the sentiments and wishes addressed 19 years ago to his son by the man with whom we have parted for a time. He has now been laid low in full anticipation of a glorious rising. The good fight of faith has been fought—he has entered into his rest and his works will follow him. 
#
Hawke’s Bay Herald 14 February 1899.
LATE REV. MR. COLENSO.
SIR,— Referring to the lamented decease of the late Mr Colenso, who is acknowledged by all that knew him to have been kindly disposed to his fellow-creatures, and who would have resented, during his life time being charged with vanity or any selflsh motive for his philanthropic action, I am impelled to write these few lines to point out what I consider an outrage on the memory of the deceased gentleman. I refer to the fact that portions of the will were made public on Saturday last prior to the funeral. This sacreligious outrage and breach of confidence someone is responsible for, seeing that the contents of the will should remain sacred at least till the remains of the testator were buried. It seems to me, sir, and I think that all decent-minded people will agree with me, that an explanatian for the unseemly publication of portions of the will of the late Mr Colenso demand some explanation from the executors, who must meantime be held responsible for the premature and indecent public announcement.—I am, &c.,
                	ONE WHO KNEW THE GOOD OLD MAN. 
       February 13th, 1899. 
#
Editorial: The Northern Advocate 18 February 1899.
The Rev. W. Colenso, F.R.S., F.L.S., one of New Zealand’s earliest settlers, died this week at Napier, aged 88. He introduced to New Zealand the first printing press, which was landed at the Bay of Islands on January 3, 1835. He was a devoted student of science and probably the best Maori scholar and antiquarian in New Zealand. He left several charitable bequests. 
#
Editorial: Hawke’s Bay Herald 23 February 1899.
A correspondent writing to the Auckland Herald on the late Rev. William Colenso, says:— “An ably-written ‘Life of William Colenso’ would be a most valuable addition to New Zealand literature. Mr Henry Hill, the inspector of schools for Hawke’s Bay, was to the last a trusted friend of the great man, and to him I imagine the task would be most congenial. Our Government might at least acknowledge a great wrong done to a man now dead by arranging for the publication of such an interesting work.”
#
Editorial: The Colonist 28 February 1899.
The Rev. William Colenso, whose death at Napier was recorded last week, was a printer of the old school, and as conservative in this respect as he could well be. Any attempt to coach him in the up-to-datedness of the printing art was to offer him grevious insult, and was met with profound contempt. In the days of Provincialism he was for many years Superintendent of the Province of Hawke’s Bay, and while in office he made it his hobby to revise the proofs of every scrap of Council printing before it was finally machined. And beautiful exhibits these revises were when returned to the printer. What with the substitution of small capitals for large capitals, and visa versa, and the italicisation, and the ultra free use of commas, semi-colons, dashes, parentheses, and all the other points in the category, the time taken by the compositors in correcting the stuff was even more than that taken in setting it. But it was all good for the trade, and ‘Billy’s’ venerable smile was never more serene than when initialling as correct the prodigious lists of extras, and the Council smilingly paid for it all. Of the deceased scholar it may also be said that during his political career no man was more revered in the Council than he, and that no matter how intense the excitement of an electioneering contest, the courtesy extended to his fellow candidates was uniform and gentlemanly.
#
The late Mr Colenso: Sir Joseph Hooker’s eulogium:	
Hawke’s Bay Herald 13 June 1899. 
At the meeting of the Hawke’s Bay Philosophical Institute last night the following motion was passed on the motion of Mr H. Hill, seconded by Mr J. W. Craig:— “That this branch of the New Zealand Institute places upon record the great loss it has sustained by the death of the Rev. William Colenso, F.R.S., F.L.S., who from its foundation was closely connected with the society as secretary, president, and member of the Council, and as a contributor of papers on botany, anthropology, and kindred subjects, has done much for the advancement of science throughout the world.” In speaking to the motion Mr Hill read the following letter from Sir Joseph Hooker:— “The Camp, Sunningdale.—April 15th, 1899.—My Dear Sir,—Your very kind letter of February 21st reached me in Devonshire, whither it was forwarded four days ago. The touching tribute of affection for my dear old friend Colenso quite overpowered me. A small testimony of his long, warm affection for me would not, I need hardly say, have been unexpected, especially from one who had on several occasions sent gifts to my children and to myself in aid of the publication of unremunerative works—always spontaneous as they were—and not seldom from the gratification that the liberal action afforded him. It was in 1841 (not 1843, as in your charming tribute to his memory) that I first made the acquaintance that at once ripened into friendship with Colenso, and ever since (except during my travels in India) we have unremittingly corresponded, most closely indeed during the critical period of his clerical career, when he unburdened his sorrowing heart to me—sure of my deep sympathy, though powerless to aid. All you say of him is most true, and finds a repeating echo in my brain. He stands quite alone in the history of the colonisation of New Zealand, as a Christian, philanthropist, and naturalist combined in one. His portrait hangs before me in my study, and his initials carved in stone appear over a bow window of my house, or rather between the two bows. I shall get it photographed and send you a copy. I am glad indeed that he has left his plants in trust for the Philosophical Society.... I do hope that the municipality yielded to his wish that it should accept and endow it. Our last communication from him was a souvenir to my wife of a charming little book of views in New Zealand about a month ago. I cannot tell you how much I shall miss him, for he was the very last of my old correspondents of the 40’s. To have had him as one for 58 years of my life may well be a source of deep thankfulness during the remaining days that may be spared to me. If not troubling you too much, I should exceedingly like to have some account of his last illness. His last letters to me were in as vigorous a hand as his first; and he described himself in good health for his age.—	

Truly and gratefully yours,        		
											J.D. HOOKER.”
#
Auctioneers: Hawke's Bay Herald 31 August 1899
C. B. Hoadley & Co.’s sales. Preliminary notice. Important sale of Napier Hill building sites. C. B. Hoadley & Co. have received instructions from R. L. Colenso, Esq., to offer for sale by Public Auction, early in October, ALL THAT MAGNIFICENT HILL PROPERTY, Formerly the Residentiul Estate of the late Rev. W. Colenso. This Property is something over 30 acres in extent, and will be subdivided into suitable-sized Building Allotments, commanding most beautiful land and seascape views.
#
Colenso’s library, Napier:
 Nelson Colonist 8 September 1899.
Efforts to secure the late Mr Colenso’s unique library for the town have failed, his son having sold it to Messrs Angus and Robertson, of Melbourne. 
#
Hawke’s Bay Herald 9 September 1899.
Mr Ridley L. Colenso writes as follows:— “Sir,—A paragraph in your Friday’s issue re the late Rev. W. Colenso’s library, is correct but misleading. A Hawke’s Bay Philosophical Institute deputation viewed the library, and came to the conclusion that there were far more books than they would know what to do with, especially as of some of the more valuable works duplicates were already in their possession. They consequently decided to approach Messrs Angus and Robertson’s representative in order, if possible, to secure those books they required. The town of Napier could have had the whole collection at Angus and Robertson’s prices.”
#
Diocesan Synod: Hawke’s Bay Herald 27 September 1899.
On the opening of the Synod... The Rev. E. Robertshawe moved,— “That this Synod desires to place on record its deep sense of loss in the death of the Rev. W. Colenso, F.R.S., whose kindliness and liberality endeared him to all classes of the community.” —The motion was seconded by the Very Rev. the Dean, and supported by his Lordship the President, the Revs. F.E.T. Simcox and J.C. Eccles, and by Messrs H. Burdett and H. Hill, each of whom added some tribute to the memory of the late Mr Colenso, and testified to the far-reaching and unostentatious nature of his generosity.—Mr Simcox suggested it would be fitting that a memorial to his name should be placed in the Cathedral, a proposal which met with approval from subsequent speakers.—Mr Hill read an extract of a letter from Sir J. Hooker, showing the highest esteem and personal friendship for Mr Colenso as a scientist, philanthropist, and Christian.—The members of the Synod stood while the motion was put and carried.
#
Legislative Council: Evening Post 30 July 1903
The Hon. Mr. Bowen asked the Attorney-General what steps had been taken towards the publication of the late William Colenso’s Maori lexicon, and to whose custody the manuscript has been confided? The Minister stated that no steps had yet been taken to publish, and that the document was in the custody of the Native Minister. He would bring the matter before his colleagues, and subsequently give further information. 


