 # 

1 March 1839
“Bachelor’s Hall,” Paihia,
Bay Islands, 1st March 39. 
Allan Cunningham Esqr. 
Sutter’s Cottage,
Elizabeth Street, South
SYDNEY. 

My dear Friend,
The “Currency Lass” being about to move for the Capital of the Southern Hemisphere I feel myself constrained by a weight of obligation to endeavor to answer your valuable and friendly epistle of 9 January. I thank you for your information and, also, for the manner in which you have given it, for your splendid Donation of Seeds – for your Lot of Newspapers etc. etc. – really, I have no little weight of obligation on me now! How shall I make a shadow of return?
(The Bishop’s visit so “topsy-turvied” us – that I have been confined to the printg. office, in consequence since – however I send you a few dried Specimens – some paltry, – some old acquaintances to A.C. – some – may be new) “Aha! I hope so,” say you, and so say I. However there they are, – where? Why, in order that they might go dry and flat, I have packed them in a Case of Books, wch. case I have directed to Messrs. Campbell, and hope you will receive the same safely. 
In 10 or 12 days I trust to be on my way to Hokianga, Kaitaia, N. Cape, and thence by E. Coast to B. Islands – I hope to get something new. The Orchidia are all gone by for the present. – I must keep a good look out next spring. The prickly shrub I saw at the Southd. (plants of which I procured for my gardens) I cannot send this time, for those I have are all dead, save one, and that I fear will die also: – that, you saw, in Mr. B’s gardn, is not the same, I believe Mr B’s to be from New Holland, and so he thinks. There are 2 or 3 Gents. now in the land styling themselves Botanists – one is at Tauranga and wishes to ascend Tongariro, the volcano; indeed, he is, I believe gone already into the interior on his way to the Crater. Do you know by hearsay, a Mr Edgerly, living on the banks of the Hokianga? I understand he is employed by some Noble or Gentle man in England to dry and forward plants. A Dr. Day (of the Coromandel) who pd. me a visit the other day, said, that Edgerly had the ferns I have and others also and that he (E.) had found Gleichenia flabellata, ½-way up Maunga Taniwa (Mt Camel) nr. Kaitaia Station. I intend paying this gent. a visit, a la Paul Pry. Day had also a quantity for Engd. I hope you will be so alert as not to be robbed of your lawful honors by any “herb-gatherer” no not even by the writer – I wod. not give Day anything fearing what might ensue.)
Pray allow me to ask you a few Bot. questions, in addn. To those appended to specimens: – 
What does Lindley mean by Dicera dentata, and D. serrata? classed under Elæòcarpaceæ, in his Nat. system?
What is Gleichenia furcata? sd. to be a N. Zd. fern. Coccoloba australis; Forst: Prodr., n. 176. Epacris longifolia, E. rosmarinifolia, and E. pumila, Forst: Prodr. ns. 68-70. Styphelia lanceolata, Smith, N. Holland p.49; Styphelia juniperina, Willd. p.836?
Don’t call me a teaser. How shall I act otherwise, when I have no Books no Teacher? I learn from the natives that there is a plant which grows in the dense forests, which bears large roots similar to the Taro, C. esculentum, but which won’t bear cultivation. I am promised a plant root and Branch. I have a spec. of Sarchochilus in Dil. Py. acid for you, but it is not a good one – this I defer till next time. I see Lindley is publishing a splendid work on Orchideæ. 
I hope you are well – and, I almost write, not going the voyage in the Beagle – I fear that that trip will be too much for you. Pray remember me to Capt. King, and send me his address. Endeavor to decypher this scrawl for I am much pressed for time. The evidence before the Com. on the state of N. Zd. has set many good folks a-scribbling. However, the blast which bows the mountain oak leaves unscathed the lily of the valley. Why don’t you write to the Resident, and to the Williams’? Do be seized with the cacoethes scribendi, and write them all. 
Mrs Hadfield is pretty well – has been to Kaitaia. Mr W. Williams has the addition of a little girl to his family. All hands have had the influenza, in all the Stations, but we are now pretty well. 
Farewell, my dear friend, and believe me,
	Your affectionate disciple,					W. Colenso

List of Botanl. specimens sent to Mr. Cunningham, pr. “Currency Lass,” Feby. 1839

1.	Hym. min:? – fine like Hym: in specs with Asp. Flabellm. 
2.	Small Rumex-like thing fm Puketona. 
3.	that Salsola – Chenopm. thing from Mr Wade. 
4.	that procumbent thing fm. Horotutu – Chenopodm. probably. – 
5.	that scented – B. of Island like thing: hd. of water, Horotutu
6.	that large leaved blue flower plant, Tepuna. 
7.	that procumbent thing red flow? axilly. from Land nr. Boat Ha. Horotutu Plantago?
8.	that fm. Taranake Linum?
9.	that fern – Asp. vestit: fm. Tepuna
10.	that Coprosm. spathulata in fruit
11.	that myrtle-leaved downy flowered shrub from: banks of Kkeri
12.	that red drupe road to Waiomio
13.	Winiwini – P. urticinus
14.	that from Waipuriri like the Tree fm Nk. Isld. in Mr B’s garden
15.	
16.	that Viscum fm. Kkeri river large leaved
17.	that Nutmeg / Mauporo / from R Waimate
18.	that blue Wahlenbergia fm. Mr. Wade
19.	that Grass. S. sericeus not the globular headed
20.	that specn. of Epiphyte marked with black lines in back, like Dendrob and like Earina
21.	Coprosma papaumu
22.	that hemlock, scented, planted
23.	that little / (new orchis? / frm landg place. Kkawa
24.	Dros. intermedia (see p.70 Bot. M. S.)
25.	Dros. propinqua?
26.	Cercodia that small leaved Cer among fern common procumbent
27.	that Trichomanes-like-Moss
28.	Fern from hill Wainoauroa & Tepuna: 2 specs. – 
29.	Fern from that Red Clay Hill, Kawakawa & Pateretere. 
30.	Smooth Fern fm Cavern Kk N. glaucum
31.	Fern fm Cavern – Adiantum perhaps A. affine only
32.	Everlasting Kkeri fall
33.	Is this Pteris comans
34.	the linear-serrate leaf tree with white panicle from Rotorua
35.	Bur-reed? Maru
36.	That Gnaphalium from Clendon’s

Cunningham annotated the letter…
Recd 3rd April 1839
Replied to 11th & never sent
But by Curry. Lass 24 May sent. 
His reply included, “…. I find I cannot say fully anything regarding your dried plants; but I’ll now just observe on a few, reserving others until next Curry. Lass – Write me by return
No. 34 is very new Genus Ixerba Brexioides. get handsome specmns. one of the rarest plants in N. Zd. 
8 is Linum monogynum Forst. or Flax of N. Zeald. 
– The Dendrobium you know is D. C——ii of Lindley and is beautifully in flower. 
10 Coprosma spathulata
11 Pimelea – I’ll examine it
2 Cercodia do. 
17. Quite new to me, it is of Lauriæ. Pray get fine specmn as large as yr paper
12 Leucopogon Fraseri
13 I suspect from its stipules a Coprosma to be exd. 
7 A Polygonum
6 is a fine Lobelia, proby. my L. solanacea A.C. 
19 rightly named Spinifex leuceris).”
 # 

27 May 1839

Paihia 27 May ’39. 
Allan Cunningham Esqr.,
Sutter’s Cottage,
Elizabeth Street South,
SYDNEY. 

My dear Sir,
I have long been looking out for a Letter from you; however, as Mr. Taylor sails to morrow in the “Magnet”, I must endeavor to scribble you a line or two. And, first, I hope you are well, for I heard from Owen Davies that you had been very ill; however I hope this will find you at Sydney and that the Beagle has gone reconnoitering without you. Since my last have been a short round in the “Bush”. My route this, – to Hokianga – Heads – Wangape, by coast – on to Kaitaia – thence pr. N.W. Coast to Cape Maria V. Diemen and the Reinga, (i.e. the Hades of the N. Zealanders) – back to N.W. Coast, across to the neck of land to Mount Camel – Raungaunu – Kaitaia – thence to N.E. Coast – Doubtless Bay. Wangaroa – Matauri, Kerikeri, Paihia – out 3 weeks, fine weather, but obliged to travel very hastily. I hope I gained some what new (?) to myself at least: I send you, a small parcel by Mr. Taylor, in which I hope you will be interested. You can ansr. me by referring to the numbers attached to each specn. 
No. 13. Of the back of this shrub, (Pimelia?) the natives formerly made a kind of white cloth for tying up their hair, the process was simple, partly performed by chewing with the teeth!!
No. 14. Is a poor specn., but I only saw it in one spot, (at Wangape) on the N.W. Coast. 
15. I dare suppose to be Fuchsia procumbens: if so, it is a curious fact, that this plant is now growing in the Mission Gardens, the seed of which was obtained from the Colony and termed “Evening Primrose”!
18. A very minute little thing, yet a very pretty flower – this, tho’ small, is the full sized. 
22. From the native Hades!
23. Is this a new Lycopodm. ?
24. I suppose to be Lobelia littoralis. 
27. A peculiar running, twining, thing from about midway between the N.W. and N.E. Coasts. It twines about everything, across the roads, and to the tops of bushes, but no signs of leaf or fruit; or of flowers, could I anywhere discern: the natives say it bears neither leaf or flowers. 
30. This I trust is new. It is a large Fern, the one Frond I obtained ?rost. 10 feet in length; at the root is a fleshy substance which is eaten by the natives, the specn. I had, seemed very much like the Cyathea medull., however I have not yet ascertained whether it is a Tree Fern or not; it grows in the midst of dense Forests; I intend going after it in a day or so. One of these peculiarities of this Fern is the flexible joint (as it were) with which each bi-pinnate leaf, and leaflet also, is furnished; in its fresh and green state it looked peculiarly unique and beautiful; I have packed it up though not dry fearing I should not soon get another opportunity. 
Messrs W. Williams and Taylor are just returned from the neighbourhood of the East Cape, where they have been on a visit to the natives. A Mr Bidwell (?) who has been some time botanizing at the Southd. has ascended (so Fame says) to the top of Tongariro, and has gained several plants new to science; he is now in the Thames; I intend to look out for him, on his appearance in the Bay of Islds. Will you have the goodness to purchase a few Shrubs, etc., for my grounds at Paihia; say to the amount of £2.2.0, or thereabouts, which Mr. Taylor or R. Campbell will pay you on my a/c. I shod. like to have a few Morton Bay and Norfolk Island pines; I may write very ignorantly in thus writing but I have not the least conception of how these things are sold in Port Jackson – however a few shillings (here page torn) the mark, will be of no consequence. Mr Hadfield is, I think, in a very delicate state of health – and he pursues the very course to make himself more so, a glass of cold water, for Breakfast, and a bit of bread for Dinner, and little or no outdoor exercise, will never make or support a constitution for a N. Zd. Missionary. The Busby’s are all well; children charmingly so. The R. Catholic Bishop is active, but I understand, rather straitened for supplies. We have had a very dry summer, and winter hitherto; no puddles yet, no, not even at Waimate; and very mild. The Larkspurs and pinks are still in bloom. I’m thinking of making an enclosure up in the glen, behind Paihia, for Ferns; give me your opinions on the subject. 
I have at length, got through this letter pray excuse this horrid scrawl. I have been called off 2 or 3 times since I sat down and what with so much raruraru, as we say in Native, or in English hurry-scurry – that I can hardly collect my fugitive thoughts. 
Mr. Wilson accompanies Mr. Taylor – pray get from them all local news, with which you may be interested. 
Expecting daily to hear from you, and hoping that your health is improving. 
	Believe me,
		Yours very truly,
			W. Colenso. 
(In Captain King’s hand) This letter was found by me in Mr Cunningham’s pocket after his death – the pocket of his Dressing gown he wore when he died – a letter also was with it for Mr H. Williams – which I have enclosed to him. 

Plants to Mr Cunningham May 27/39 pr. Mr? – Taylors
1.	Buttoned-like thing – Mangungu
2.	Fern from Station – Mangungu
3.	That Spinous padded thing Muddy Mangungu (Indigenous?)
4.	Convolvulus – Sleepg. place near Rangitoto
5.	Jointed Samphire?
6.	Cresps. shrub. frm Sandhills Berries white edible
7.	Tauhinie, Sandhills
8.	Fern – L. lanceolata?
9.	Finest Epilobium
10.	That little thing road to Waiomio? but from Sandhills
11.	Whitest Puketea – coast
12.	that pretty little Mingi like shrub from low Sandhills
13.	Shrub bark made to a cloth
14.	Dead Fern from Wangape
15.	Fuchsia procumbens
16.	Toetoe from Wangape Valley
17.	Plant like that at Hd. of Horotutu B. of Islands!!
18.	Hairy minute plant Watercourse Sd. Hills
19.	other plant from that Watercourse (like English Ranunculus glaucus)
20.	Triticum repens? N.W. Coast
21.	Branched rush from Bog nr. Kaitaia
22.	(Pimelia Gnidia?) from Reinga
23.	Club Moss? Bog nr. Kaitaia
24.	Lobelia – from Sea shore Muriwhenua
25.	White berried pointed leaved thing from sand hills Hohora
26.	Veronica-like shrub nr. Mt. Camel
27.	running creeper no leaves
28.	Shrub from nr. Tohoranui white mould here & there
29.	Coprosma; river bank road to Pakaraka
30.	New Fern Para
31.	Little debilis thing from bog Kaitaia
32.	little rounded thing like Drosera from Bog Kaitaia


Robert Heward identified the plants in a letter received by Colenso on 29 November 1842. 
               
          5 Young St   
                            Kensington
                                          London	
                                                            7 Decr. 1841
Sir
Your acquaintance with my lamented friend Allan Cunningham must be my apology as a stranger for addressing you but in our late friend’s herbarium which he kindly bequeathed to me and which you will be pleased to hear reached England in perfect safety I found two bundles of specimens bundled and with queries as to their names &c attached to them one bundle had evidently been opened by Cunningham as I found two or three observations of his on the tickets the other Captain King wrote me only arrived in Sydney a few days before his decease. I have endeavoured as far as I am able to answer your queries which you will see on the other side, among your specimens are some that Cunningham was most probably unacquainted with at least they are not in his herbarium nor has he noted them in his paper on the plants of New Zealand which I am happy to find my friend Sir W. Hooker has forwarded to you and which I doubt not you will be much interested in, these numbers I will mark with a  some of them are particularly interesting – No. 17 Drimys axillaris in flower, specimens of which in fruit are a great desiderata as also of No. 34 Ixerba brexioides a genus of Cunningham’s but of which I believe he never saw the fruit. No. 14 Trophus opaca male flowers, female flowers and fruit which if the plant is diœceous are on different trees. The Coniferæ of New Zealand in fruit and with their native names would be of great service in elucidating many species that are at present very imperfectly known – in Cunningham’s herbarium there are but three species in fruit. At any time that you may have the opportunity of transmitting me specimens from your interesting islands they will be most thankfully received and I shall be most happy on any occasion that you may point out of returning your kindness – I have written a sketch of the labours of our late friend which if you will inform me how I can forward to you shall be transmitted. I shall also describe the new plants found by Cunningham in his visit of 1838 which shall be forwarded at the same time. 
	Believe me to be Sir
		Yrs very faithfully
Robt. Heward

No. 1. Hymenophyllum Tunbridgense, Sm. 
 2. Gonocarpus diphyllus, Hew. (n. s.)
 3. Chenopodium prostratum, R. Br. 
4.         ———— Botrys, Linn. 
 5. Siegesbeckia microcephala, Dec. 
6. Lobelia physoloides, Cunn. 
 7. Polygonum filcheium, R. Br. 
8. Linum monogynum, Forst. 
9. Aspidium vestitium? Forst. (this is probably distinct from A. vestitium)
10. Coprosma spathulata, Cunn. 
11. Pimelea virgata, Vahl. 
12. Leucopogon Tensori, Cunn. 
 13. Euribia sedifolius, Hew, (n. s.)
14. Trophus opaca, Sol. 
15. No ticket of this number but probably Dendrobium cunninghamii, Lind. as that specimen wanted a ticket. 
16. Viscum antarcticum, Forst. 
 17. Drimys axillaris, Forst. (Cunningham did not see this plant. What he has named as such in his paper is an undescribed species of Myrsine). 
18. Wahlenbergia gracilis, A Rich. 
19. Spinifex sericeus, R. Br. 
20. Earina mucronata, Lind. 
21. Coprosma lucida, Dec. 
 22. Caucalis glochidiata, Poir. 
23. Triglochin flaccidum, Cunn. 
24. Drosera binata, Lab. 
25.     —— propinqua, Cunn. 
26. Gonocarpus tetragynus, Dec. 
27. Hypericum Menziesii, Hook. (young)
 28. Adiantum assimile, Sw. 
29. Lindsea trichomanoides, Dry. 
30. Nephrodium glabellum, Cunn. 
31. Adiantum affine, Will. 
32. Gnaphalium simplex, A Rich. 
33. Pteris macilenta, A Rich. 
34. Ixerba brexioides, Cunn. 
 35. Sparganium simplex, R. Br. 
 36. Conyza angustifolia, Hew (n. s.)

     1. Myriogyne minuta, Less. 
2. (Ticket wanting)
3. Centaurea riparia, Cunn. 
4. Ipomea pendula, R. Br. 
5. Graminea (imperfect)
6. Coprosma acerosa, Cunn. 
7. Cassinia leptophylla, R. Br. 
 8. Lomaria Banksii, Hew. (n. s.)
9. Epilobium rotundifolium, Forst. 
10. Leucopogon Fraseri, Cunn. 
11. Gnaphalium luteo-album, Linn. 
 12. Leucopogon Richei? R. Br. 
13. Pimelea arenaria, Cunn. 
          —— prostrata, Vahl. 
 14. Notholæna distans, R. Br. 
15. Hibiscus vesicarius, Linn. 
 16. Cyperus fulvus? R. Br. 
17. Siegesbeckia microcephala, Dec. 
 18. Limosella australis, R. Br. 
19. Hydrocotele Novæ Zelandiæ, Dec. 
 20. Paspalum littorale, R. Br. 
21. Restiaceæ (imperfect)
22. Mniarum biflorum, Forst. 
 23. Lycopodium inundatum, Linn. (probably distinct)
24. Goodenia repens, R. Br. 
25. Cyathodes acerosa, R. Br. 
26. Veronica diosmifolia, Cunn. 
 27. Cuscuta australis, R. Br. (imperfect)
28. Trichea procumbens, Cunn. 
29. Coprosma divaricata, Cunn. 
30. (Ticket wanting) 
31. Goniocarpus depressus
32. (Imperfect but very curious, should like to see more of it). 
The two missing tickets probably belong to Botrychium australe R. Br. and Dendrobium Cunninghamii Lind., which were without them. 
It was the first of these lists that Cunningham had looked at and marked a few tickets with their names, among the plants now first discovered in New Zealand are twelve that are natives of New Holland, the remaining five are decidedly unpublished species for which I shall do myself the pleasure of giving you due credit for. 
R Heward
 # 


12 July 1839
		Bachelor’s Hall, Paihia			Bay of Islands			12th July 1839
Allan Cunningham Esqr.,
Hart’s Buildings,
Pitt Street,
SYDNEY

My dear Friend,
I duly received your letter of the 11th April, for which I pray you to receive my hearty thanks. I felt, and do feel, really concerned to hear of the state of your health but could not help rejoicing that you did not go in the “Beagle” not that I envy you your gaining more Botanl. honors no! but because I believe that your infirm state of health wod. not bear it. You would, when there, have exerted yourself beyond your strength, and thus probably have increased, your malady. I hope ere this you are much better so that you may go to the Land of our Fathers with renovated powers. How I long to see your work in print! Willingly would I become a 5 to 10 guinea subscriber to a Work on the Boty. of N.Z. especially edited by my Bot. Master and friend A.C. 
Your letter came to hand as I was going into the “Bush” (brought after me by a native in a Canoe) and your always-to-be-borne in mind friendly present of a Bot. Glass, doubly enhanced to me in value from having seen it around your neck and used by you – I was then going on the outer Coast between Cape Brett and Wanganui. I went – returned – and hope I have something new – but must wait for an oppy. – I have a new orchis (terrestrial) a little gem, and I fancy a Pittosporum also – if not another handsome shrub (which I dare not attempt to name). I have found Schizea dichotoma (at least I suppose so) and an Ophioglossum, which may be a new species. I have also a beautiful little Trichomanes which is perhaps known to you. Have seen the Para (Marattia elegans) growing wild – splendid – and have fine specs. Have heard from good native authority of several strange plants (trees) growing on the islets (only) on the E. coast of N. Zd. – one, has very large leaves large enough (so say natives) to wrap a cod fish in! This Summer (D. V.) I shall be in ye. neighbourhood and then I’ll get it, and send you. We have had an exceedingly dry winter and the Orchideæ are “coming out” beautifully – in my road home from the E. Coast, the hills were studded with these beautiful little harbingers of spring – how truly God is to be seen in all his Works! In my opinion more of the Wisdom and power of the Creator is to be seen in minute than in larger objects. Strange, that the orchideæ in that neighd. were all in flower, here they are but just in bud! I have not yet seen Gastrodia, but intend going next week to the Kauri forest where I hope to find him. Per first oppry. I’ll remember you; you say in your last, “where you picked up the idea that Gleichenia furcata is a N. Zd. plant I don’t know” – Stay – See Lindley’s Int. to Boty. Second ed. 1835, p.522”. N. Zealand, Kingdom (Forster’s Kingdom) characteristic species: Gleichenia furcata, Dracæna australis’(?) “Andromeda rupestris (your Gaultheria rupestris?) “Melaleuca sp.,” etc. etc. Have you seen this 2nd Edition?
(Ere this I suppose you have seen Mr Bidwell, who remained one night under my roof – he has somewhat new from the Southd., but deals somewhat in the Marvellous. However I found him very communicative and obliging; he gave me several native seeds which I have carefully sown, so that tho I may not be permitted to tread the “cloud capt” summit of Tongariro, yet I may have the pleasure of rearing Alpine plants in the Bay of Islds. He speaks very highly of Don’s Botl. work, wod. you advise me to purchase it? What work wod. you recommend me to get, that I may be able to classify any plants I may hereafter fall in with; as you are going such a long way from N. Zd. ?)
I have Lindley’s Introdn. and also his Natural System, 2nd Ed., for should God be pleased to spare me a few years in N. Zd. I trust to discover somewhat in addn. to yr. valuable discoveries, in the Boty. of this land – for I am of opinion much remains to be done – in the interior and Southern Districts. At present, I know not when I find a new thing or not – cod. you give me a few hints from yr. Mss. on the plants of N. Zd. before you leave the Colony – a list, or kind of descripn. of same? for my own private use. Again, shall I follow you in your migrations to Old Engd. with specimens and teasing letters? Another thing I wish to know is the best mode of taking plants to Engd., and what kinds are most prized there; what unknown (by sight) to Botanists, etc. etc. I do not intend to become plant-Hawker or Market gardr., but, I may have to go to Engd. and shod. be glad to take home some plants from N. Zd. 
I trust I have not robbed you of your patience in this tiresome epistle – my eyes are very painful and my paper is filled. I found the Tegrag: expansa, on the Coast the other day, for the first: I had well nigh despaired of ever falling in with it. I have several orchideæ flowg in pots, in my window. Pray write me by first oppory. We are all pretty well – much as usual. The Resident intends leaving for England, soon. We are much in want of some English news; not having had any for some time. May the Lord of his great mercy direct and bless you! It is probable we shall never meet again here. May we, my dear friend, there, free from weariness, or any alloy. Believe me ever your most sincere well-wisher and disciple and friend. 
			William Colenso

Returned unopened to W.C. by Capt. King
13 Nov. 39. 
 # 
6 January 1840

Paihia, January 6th, 1840. 

Capt. P.P. King, RN.,
Care of Messrs. Edwards & Hunter,
SYDNEY. 

My dear Sir,
Your very kind and. acceptable letter of Octr. 23, pr. Mr. Alexander Busby, came duly to hand, and should have been answered by me long ere this, but I have been travelling in the “Bush” visiting the Natives, &c. &c. and so missed the different opportunities which presented themselves of writing to the Colony. 
I feel myself greatly obliged for your kindness in giving me so much Information relative to our deceased friend, and should very much like to know what has been adopted by the Meeting called in the Bot. Gardens, with regard to the erection of some Memorial to Cunningham’s memory. If anything is about to be done, and. that by subscription, I should be most happy to obtain a subscription List, and so to get a few subscribers among our friends in this land. New Zealand ought to have a share in this work: here, he labored – here, in the Botany of this land, his whole mind was, as it were, concentrated– and here it was, too, that he sustained that severe shock which I have little doubt hastened his end; I allude to that fatal winter’s night in the damp and dense Kaitaia wood, sans food, sans covering.  Should, however, your Lists be filled, and. Your not in want of any little accession to your funds, pray accept my mite of £2.2.0 which I most willingly contribute to the object in question. 
You kindly offer “to put me in correspondence with Prof. Hooker” which offer of yours I most thankfully accept. It is almost certain that I shall be enabled to send him several new, not to say interesting, specimens of the Botany of N. Zealand, from my having occasionally to travel about in the Interior. I sent Cunningham some specimens, which were quite new to Science, as he informed me, but, unfortunately, he had not time then to examine them so as to describe and name them.  Pray send me Dr. Hooker’s address, when convenient. Mr. A. Busby is still here, but expects to sail shortly, and as the opportunity of sending anything in charge to England is a good one, I think it is very probable that I may send some specimens, both dry and in spirit, to Dr. H., if I can succeed in obtaining his address. 
I hope you safely received your Book – Melville on Fuci, which I sent enclosed to Campbell for you. Have you Don’s Botanical Work? or, have you seen the same? and can you tell me anything about it? I wrote Mr. Bidwell to borrow a vol. (I believe he has the work), merely to have a peep at the merits of the same, but I have not received his answer. 
Pray, my dear Sir, can you inform me, what Nos. of the New Natural History contain Cunningham’s Papers on the Botany of N. Zealand? the price of each number, the mode of publishing – the number of parts already published, &c. I fear I have sadly taxed your valuable time with my many queries; but, the truth is, I have no one to whom I can apply in the Southern Hemisphere besides yourself on these subjects; therefore, I pray you, with your wonted courtesy, to pardon me in this. 
Hoping that you enjoy good health; and wishing you the compliments of the Season,
I am,
     My dear Sir,
          Ever yours truly,
               WILLIAM COLENSO. 
 # 

14 February 1840
Paihia, Bay of Islands, N. Zealand. 
Feby 14, 1840. 
Sir W. J. Hooker,
Regius Prof. of Botany,
University Glasgow

My dear Sir,
An entire stranger, wishing to advance the science of Botany, takes on himself the liberty of addressing you without an introduction and also to send you a few specimens of Plants, among which he hopes you will find at least a few that may prove an acquisition to your Herbarium. 
The writer of this had the pleasure of being well-acquainted with your much lamented Botanist Allan Cunningham; we regularly corresponded, and I was enabled to send him several specimens of the Botany of N. Zealand, which notwithstanding his indefatiguability in botanical pursuits in this land, were quite new, both to him and to science. Had he lived, I should have continued to send him all that I met with, for he was a valued friend, and his intention was to return to England to arrange his herbaria, and give to science the fruits of his many years of labor as a practical Botanist. Of his death, I dare say you have been made acquainted. Capt. King, R.N., one of his executors, and a Gent. with whom I have the pleasure of corresponding, hearing from him that I was about to open a correspondence with some one of the Botanists of England, suggested in a letter of his to me, that I should do so with Sir W. J. Hooker, which is the cause of my now addressing you. 
By this ship I forward you two Boxes: – one, containing several of the Orchideæ of N. Zealand, in diluted Hy. acid: – the other, a few dried specimens. I hope they will arrive safe. They are but a few, it is true, and some of them are but inferior specimens, but my Herbaria have been so culled over by one friend and another that I had not many Duplicates remaining. I have many more by me of Genera not now sent, but the vessel sails tomorrow – and I have not another case ready made by me, &c. &c. Receive these, however, my dear Sir, as a Preface, and if you wish, I will endeavour to send you some others very shortly. 
From my situation in this Land, I have very many opportunities of collecting specimens when travelling among the Natives, which a Botanist merely visiting N. Zealand for a short period cannot possibly have. In my last journey I got several plants which are quite new to me, and I would that some of them at least were so to science. One of which from its general appearance I should suppose to belong to Taxaceæ – if so, an undescribed one – I have not yet got it in fruit, but hope soon to obtain it. 
In the Bottles you will find the following Orchideæ: – In the large Bottle; – Thelymitra Forsterii (A. Cunningham) perhaps a 2nd species (W.C.) – Microtis Banksii (A. Cunningham) Pterostylis_Banksii (A. Cunningham) Bolbophyllum pygmæum Lindley – and what I believe to be a species of Sarcochilus found in Octr. 39, on Myoporum lætum by W.C. (I very much lament my not having some one of those modern Botanical works which would enable to speak positively. In this instance, as well as in several others, I can only make at least a shrewd guess). In Bottle, numbered 2, Pterostylis collina, n. sp., take a short descript. as given by my friend A.C. on my finding it in Sept. 1838, during his residence in this place – “Appendix apice diviso, penicillato. Folia radicula. Scapus bibracteatus aphyllus.” W.C. – In No. 3, Earina mucronata Lindley – In No. 4, Orthoceras strictum Brown – In No. 5, Acianthus fornicatus A.C. – In No. 6, Thelymitra grandiflora n. sp. perianthis erectiusculo, cuculli laciniis extrinis cuspidatis eroso-denticulatis imberbibus: intermedia dorso nudo emarginata tuberculata, margine incurvato incrassato, spica multiflora – W.C. in litt., 1838. A very remarkable species; nearly 3 feet high, of a most brilliant Indigo colour &c. &c. – A Cyrtostylis – it may be C. reniformis Brown, or a new species W.C. – Another, just obtained, a perfect gem, and which I believe to be entirely new – have not time to examine it. In No. 7, an Orchis, perhaps a new sp. of Caladenia, W.C. – a Thelymitra which I have ventured to consider a distinct sp. and have named it in my Herb. as T. straminea,W.C. – 
The dried specs. must speak for themselves. I send you what I believe to be a new sp. of Laurinæ and which I have named L. Victoriana – a new sp. of Solanæ, of Ericeæ, of Fuchsiæ, of Droseraceæ, of Lobelliaceæ and of Pittosporaceæ; this last, may possibly be the P. crassifolium of Solander; – I think, also, that I have added a sp. of Labiatæ to the solitary one from N.Z. already known (Micromeria Cunninghamii Benth.) of Filices only a few are in the Box now sent, there may be a new sp. or two among the Hymenophyllæ. I send a frondlet of what I believe to be a Marattia probably the M. elegans of Endlicher; &c. &c. 
I have directed the Boxes to the care of one of the officers in the Church Missy. House, Salisbury Sq., whom I have also requested to forward the same immediately to you to Glasgow; though I know not your address, other than as I have directed this letter. Pray inform me, my dear Sir, of their safe arrival. 
Cunningham informed me that he had published somewhat of the Bot. of N. Zealand in the “Botanical Magazine” – doubtless you know the work. If the Nos. which contain Cunningham’s papers could be had separately, I should much like to get them. I understand that Lindley has recently published a work on Orchideæ; I have sent pr. this opportunity to London to obtain the same. 
Pray let me know what deficiencies there are in your Herbaria, which N. Zealand. can supply, and I’ll endeavour to obtain them for you. I have not sent you a single spec. of Coniferæ or Taxaceæ, save a small one of Dacrydium cupressinum Sol.; because I have not, at present, a good specimen by me. 
Excuse this intrusion of a stranger who wishes well to science, and who has it not in his power from his multitudinous duties, either to examine for himself or to make known the Botany of this interesting portion of the vegetable kingdom, save through one of the practical Botanists of the day and believe me, ever my dear Sir,
Most truly yours,
William Colenso. 
Cunningham left all his Herbaria & Mss. to a Mr. Heward of Kensington; Have you heard whether Mr. H. intends publishing them or not?
 # 

20 July 1841

		Paihia, Bay Islands, July 20, 1841
Sir W. J. Hooker,
Reg. Prof. Bot:
       &c. &c. &c. 

My dear Sir William,
I cannot tell you how happy I am in the receipt of your very frank and welcome Letter of Aug. 6 and 10th/40. It was a long while in coming hither, and I had almost concluded that the few specimens I had forwarded must have gone to the bottom of the Sea, when yours arrived, dispelled my fears, and assured me of their safety. The valuable parcel of Books too, came to hand last week all in good condition, for which I will not attempt to describe my thankfulness. Allow me, my dear Sir William, to assure you that every specimen I can possibly lay hands on – which I may consider as worth your acceptance – shall, with as little delay as possible, be transmitted to you; I trust thus to endeavour at least to make a step towards the shadow of a return. I should have answered yours ere this, only I have been waiting, first, for some opportunity direct for England, and, Second for the approaching season, in hope of getting a few new Orchideæ but, on second thoughts I have determined to wait no longer but to send you forthwith what few things I may have by me. 
Since my last, I have been a journey of about 4 weeks to Wangarei Bay & neighbourhood, returning by a circuitous route, via the interior. My primary object was (as it always necessarily must be) to visit the Natives residing in those parts, but I always endeavour to enlarge my acquaintance with the Botany of this interesting Island in those Journées, and so make as much use of such opportunities as possible. I trust that in the Box now sent you will find something both new and interesting. One new pine and two new orchideæ (not to mention several other plants, as far as I am aware, both new and undescribed,) have amply repaid me for any exertion I may have made on that journey. The greater part however of the specimens now forwarded are of plants which are known and described. I have hazarded in some species, the burdening you with Triplicates, although I cannot say much for their perfectness or beauty. I have gone however regularly through my Herbaria and have sent you such as I had, and hope, my dear Sir William, that they will give you as much pleasure in the receipt as they did me, in the gathering & packing them up for you. 
You will also find among them specimens of all the known Coniferæ and Taxaceæ of this Island, in fruit, with the exception of Dacrydium plumosum Don which I have not yet seen in fruit myself. This is rather a scarce pine in this neighbourhood, being only casually met with on the ridges of the highest hills, I had made several journeys ere I could meet with a single Tree of the species, and those that I have subsequently examined were not in fruit. It is so very difficult a matter to obtain a good specimen from any of the Pine Tribe, owing to height & situation of the fruit-bearing branches of these monarchs of the Forest. Lindley gives, as an Essential character of Taxaceæ – “ovules naked, their outer skin becoming finally hard. Seed hard, either altogether naked or surrounded by a cup-shaped pericarp. Trees or Shrubs with continuous unarticulated Branches.” If these be the real characters of all plants of this order, I presume that some, at least, of the hitherto considered N. Zealand species must be formed into a distinct one. For Podocarpus ferruginea bears a large and fleshy drupa and certainly has (if I understand the term aright) articulated Branches. So, also, does the Mae or Matai of the N. Zealanders, (Dacrydium mai? A.C.). Both of these fruits, (i.e. their epi- and sarcocarp,) are eaten by the Natives. Nothing can equal the elegant appearance of the fruit of P. ferruginea when fully ripe. Its carmine-coloured drupæ besprinkled with a glaucous powder, present a most beautiful and tempting fruit to the traveller. Unfortunately the flavour possesses so much of that turpentine-like gust peculiar to the Pine Tribe, as to cause them to be invariably rejected, after a single trial, by the European visitant. The fleshy receptacles in D. cupressinum, (Rimu,) and P. Totarra, (Totara,) are eaten by the Natives, but from their being much smaller are not so highly esteemed. The Receptacles, in all the species, are coloured from orange to Crimson, and, in their Season, have a most splendid appearance. The Natives have assured me of a Kahikatea, (D. excelsum) which bears its ovules on a white receptacle. I have not yet seen it although I have sought it assiduously, and, therefore, cannot say whether it is merely a variety of D. excelsum or a distinct species. I have been fortunate enough to procure some male flowers in one or two of the species; but as I have not yet seen flowers of both sexes on the same plant, I conclude (for the present) that they are all Diœcious. 
The specimens that I either believe to be new, or have some remark to offer on, I have numbered, that I might the more easily refer to them in my Letter, and that you, also, might be the better enabled kindly to give me your opinion on each, Seriatim. 
To commence then, with my numbers
No. 10. A Pittosporum (n. sp. ?) from the coast, Wangarei Bay; a tree of 20 feet; flowers very few; native name, Tawaapou.
″     11. This small and petiole-winged Tree, (the fruit of which is in a separate paper, No. 11,) I thought at first, to be something new, but from the fruit, &c, I suppose it to be the Melicope simplex, of A. Cunningham, obtained at Wairua, about 15 miles W. of Wangarei Bay. Native name Tanekaha. 
″     12  A Tree, 30-140 feet, same locality as preceding: native name, Mahimahi. 
″     13  This small Tree may be the Myrsine divaricata, of A.C. Poataniwa of Natives: – from the same place as preceding (If this should be as I have supposed, then there is another Myrsine and a n. sp., among the specimens; which in my hasty packing I supposed to be M. divaricata.)
 ″     14  This, I hope, will prove a n. sp. of Lauraceæ. A small Tree from 12 to 20 feet in height, of very peculiar appearance, from its black bark and strikingly coloured leaf. At first seeing it I gathered and tasted a leaf, and, really, I thought I should lose the use of my tongue and mouth, from the great heat, caused by the pungency of the plant I had tasted. Hitherto I have only met with it in the rich alluvial soil on the immediate banks of the River Wairua. Native name, Puhikawa. I obtained the specs, in flower, in April 1840, and those in fruit, in April 1841. 
 ″      15  Another n. sp. of Lauriæ; of this living plants have been sent to England, (in two Cabins sent home by my friend Mr. Busby, and which I assisted him to pot, &c,) it has been named by me L. Victoriana. I furnished Allan Cunningham, in my last parcel to him, with specimens of this plant. Tree, about 30 feet, in woods in the Interior. Native name, Tawaraunui. 
No. ?16. A single leaf! from a peculiar succulent & medullary shrub which I happened to find growing on the coast, in Wangaruru Bay. It had a single stem, about 14 feet high, with a crown of such leaves, as the one now sent, on its apex, but neither fruit nor flower. From the appearance of this single plant, I should infer, that it did not generally branch but merely grew upwards in height. The stalk was round, and the leaves were produced from all sides at right angles. From the Native account it should appear, that the plant is common on the Islets of Wangarei Bay, (where they say both leaves & plants are much larger.) but not to be found on the main. Someday I hope to visit those Isles. Native name, Puka. 
″      17. A Scrap, from a bog near Wangarei. (?Linum monogynum) [The name in parentheses is in another hand]. 
″      18. I suppose to be a n. sp. of Compositæ. I obtained it from the summit of the high hills on the N. side of Wangarei Bay. It had passed flowering & I could not procure a more perfect specimen. It grows plentifully there. Native name, Tikumu. 
19.  A Scrap from a young plant in a forest near Wangarei. I could see nothing more like it, though I made a diligent search. 
20.  A Chenopodiuin, (?) from the Sandy Beach, near the heads of Ngunguru River. 
21.  A Hymenophyllum (unknown to me) from woods near Wangarei, on trees. 
22.  A n. sp. of Violaceæ, from alluvial banks of the R. Wairua. Could not find a single specimen in flower. 
23.  A n. sp. of Myrtaceæ, (?) from same locality as 22, where only it has been observed. A shrub, 7-10 feet, with few branches & leaves, and, apparently, of very slow growth, Fruit ripe in April, and good eating (see a few in spirits in a phial.). The Natives spread their Blankets under the shrubs and, shaking them, soon procure a large supply of fruit. I saw some gallons which were thus obtained. In its fresh & ripe state, the fruit is of a beautiful orange colour; those in spirit were brought to Paihia by me in my travellg. box ere they were preserved; hence their dull appearance. Native name, Rohutu. 
24.  A n. sp. (?) of Carex from same place as the preceding,
25.  A bad specimen (and the only one I possess) of a peculiar succulent shrub (possibly allied to No. 16.) from the E. Coast, near Ngunguru. Height; 8-11 feet; round – stalk branched, & much leaved, I gathered this specimen, merely as a remembrancer, in journeying onwards, intending to return by the same route; circumstances, however, caused me to return by the Interior, by which I lost my opportunity of procuring specimens. Native name, Parapara. 
26. – A Coprosma probably a new sp., and near C. rhamnoides, A.C.; it may be a variety of that sp. 
27. – The King of the lot! My new pine from the high hills near the E. Coast. For several years I had heard of this species of pine from the Natives, but could never obtain a specimen, for no native knew whence one was to be gained. They had heard of such a Tree, and some of the oldest Chiefs had occasionally seen it, when either hunting or shooting in the forests, but all agreed that it was extremely scarce, being only seen singly. The reason, too, for its scarcity was also assigned, it being hid by Tane, one of their illustrious demigods! – Still it existed – a distinct tree – one that never rotted, &c. – As a proof of which they always (when they could find one) used it as a Coffin for the remains of their Chiefs. All this, you may suppose, served only as fuel to my already inflamed desire of possession, I sought and sought, but in vain; in every place I went I enquired after it, offering rewards for it, until I actually gained a name among the Natives, through my doing so. At last, on the 18th, March, 1841 (after a toilsome march through an unfrequented wood and jungle to the spot where I was informed one grew,) I found it! I wont attempt to describe my satisfaction on my doing so, much less the increase of the same on my gaining specimens & finding them in fruit!! The Tree (for a Pine,) is not large; about 50 feet in height, and 2ft. 6in. in diameter, but, from the Natives’ account, its principal value should lie in its resisting rottenness. – In appearance it somewhat resembles the Kahikatea, (D. excelsum) and I venture to suppose that it may form a new & connecting genus between Phyllocladus & Dacrydium. This, however, you will ascertain. Its native name is Manoao. I did intend, (if it could be considered as the type of a new genus,) to name it Allanis after my dear & much lamented friend, Allan C., I find, however, that Schomburgh has preceded and anticipated me in this matter. I leave, of course, the naming to you. I send also, a sp of the wood. The bark, on the trunk, is deciduous; but not like that of the Totara, which is fibrous; this is scaly & brittle, resembling that of the Dammara australis. Subsequently on the same range, I saw two others, pretty nearly of the same size as above. 
28. – An orchis, n. sp.: this plant I had casually seen in the woods from time to time, but never in flower. Although I had marked the places where it grew, and often visited the plants so marked but only to be disappointed. However, in April last, I found it splendidly in flower, and filling the air with its strong perfume. It is, as you will see, Epiphytical, and to me it seems to have the habit, &c, of Earina mucronata. I send you also, a sp. in acid. From dense forests in the Interior. 
29. – A Coprosma; n. sp.? from the muddy banks of the R. Wairua. 
30. – A small Ranunculus, found near Otaika, a village in Wangarei bay. 
31. – Different sp. of Santalaceæ; perhaps all already described under A. Cunningham’s, Genus Mira. From dense woods. 
32. – A specimen (with neither flowers nor fruit.) of the vernation of a stately Tree, growing in the forests near Wangarei Bay. Height 40-60 feet. I have, at different times, sought for specimens possessing either flowers or fruit, but hitherto in vain. The Natives assert that its wood is red. Their name for it, is Hutu. I believe it to be undescribed, &c, that it may prove a valuable timber tree, should it be found in any quantity. It may possibly prove a n. sp. of Fagus. I have heard that it abounds in the S. parts of this Island; where the Dammara is not met with. 
33. – A pretty tree height 10-18 feet, from Wangarei. Branches, brachiate and regular. Leaves generally variegated & clouded with yellow. Flowers, white. March, 1841. 
[Drimys axillaris.]
34. – A Chenopodium from the sandy beaches near the S. Head of Wangaruru bay. 
35. – A Veronica, found growing among Fern at Cape M. V. Diemen; where it abounds. A small shrub, from 2 to 3 feet high. March, 1839. 
36. – Specimen of a pretty little plant, growing in beds under water, in a small brook running between the Sandhills, on the N.W. Coast, near Wangape! March, 1839. 
37. – From an Islet, off the S. Head of Wangaruru Bay. 
38. – From Cape M. V. Diemen; March, 1839, Subsequently seen in similarly exposed rocky situations on the E. Coast; growing in moss-like tufts. 
39. – A Chenopodium from the Seaside, Wananake Bay, Decr. 1839. 
40. – A Plantago from clayey cliffs, near the same locality, Hitherto not observed by me in any other part,– Decr. 1839. 
41. – A Scrap from a small and low shrub, which forms thick bushes in the sand hills on the N.W. Coast,– March, 1839. Apparently nearly allied to Leucopogon fasciculata. 
42. – An undescribed sp. of Solanum, (sent by me to A. Cunningham.) found on dry banks in this neighbourhood. I have often marvelled at their being no notice of this common plant by an Botanist. It is recumbent and spreading; the berries, when ripe, are eaten by the Natives, who call it Poporo. Solanum recumbens, W.C., 1835. 
43. A specimen of a Cruciferous Plant; formerly eaten by Natives, and by them called Toi. Common in their plantations & in most alluvial soils. 
44. – A Myrsine, probably a n. sp. from woods in the Interior. 
45. – A Coprosma, from near the road hence to the Waimate Station. As I have only seen one plant of it, it may possibly be but a variety of C. divaricata A. Cunningham. 1839
46. – A rambling shrub, creeping to the top of the highest trees to which it adheres by its lateral roots; from the wood near Waikare, Bay Islands. 
47. – A Coprosma, n. sp., from a shrub growing in a thick jungle, in alluvial soil, near Waipuakakahu, in the Interior. 9-12 feet high; branches brachiate, and leaves few, Flores et fructus nullum vidi. 
48. – A Specimen of a n. sp. of Convolvulaceæ, from Matauri and Tohoranui, on the E. Coast, April, 1839. Plants, large; Flowers dark pink, striped with purple. 
49. – A n. sp. of ditto, with remarkably short petals, found among fern near Wangarei, and, also near Owae, E. Coast. Flores, albi. Decr. 1840. 
50. – A specimen of a n. sp. of ditto from E. Coast. 1841. (Possibly, Forster’s C. tuguriorum. vide Turton’s Linné, p.304. 
51.  A Wahlenbergia, n. sp.,? from near Kerikeri waterfall; Bay Islands. 
52. – A Lobelia, from the E. Coast, found by me in 1839. – I think I sent you a spcn. of this in my former parcel. 
53. – These little plants are from a bog near Kaitaia, our northern most station, where they studded the ground like so many stars. March, 1839. 
54. – The handsome Tree, of which this is a specimen, I found on the skirts of a wood near Wairua; and am happy in being enabled to send you perfect specimens in fruit and flower. Tree, 25-30 feet; fully branched and leaved. March, 1840
55. – A species of Cuscuta (?) but neither flower nor fruit. Nor could I obtain either, though I made diligent search. Neither could I discover a single root. Yet I have not the least doubt of its being parasitical on Leptospermum scoparium, the only shrub in its vicinity. It wound about every thing, not excepting the common (and in that place stunted) Pteris esculenta, crossing our path a thousand times, & rendering it extremely difficult to get onwards. On barren hills near Mount Camel, (northern extremity of N. Island.) March, 1839. Dr Dieffenbach, who lately visited that beighbourhood, informed me, that he had found it in flower, in white racemes (?) but that notwithstanding his diligent search, he, also, had failed in finding a root. Dh. did not however give me any description of the same. 
56. – A specimen of a small, but elegant, Tree, from near Owae, on the E. Coast; discovered by me in 1838, and forwarded to A. Cunningham, who, however, never lived to examine it. This very graceful plant grows to a height of from 12-16 feet. Its general appearance is fully shown in the sp. sent. Nate name Mairehau. 
57. – From a ravine, near Waitangi Cataract, Bay islands, 1840. 
58. This little Wahlenbergia, which I suppose to be a n. sp., I obtained from the high ridge of barren and clayey hills beyond the Kawakawa. Am sorry that I have not better specimens. This is its ordinary size, and it grows invariably erect. 
59. – A sp. of Labiatæ, from the N.W. Coast, near Cape M. V. Diemen, March, 1839. There it grows plentifully, near the seashore among grass and fern. 
60-70 (inclusive) Specimens of plants from the summit of Tongariro, a very high and volcanic mountain near the middle of the Island. These were sent me by a friend who resides at Rotorua, (one of our Mission Stations about 3 days journey from Tongariro,) who had them from a Gentleman who visited his Station, and who ascended the mountain to its summit in the summer of 1839. Some of them grew amid the eternal snows on the “cloud-capt” top of the cone; from which place the adventurous explorer brought a pine, (Podocarpus totara,) with its root, fully in fruit, yet only 3 inches high! The branches of which were brachiate, and recumbent, and formed a circle of a foot in diameter!! I, with pleasure, strip my own Herbarium, to send you these minute specimens; which I hope will all prove n. species. I live in expectation of visiting those parts in January next. 
72. – Specimens of a Hymenophyllum, from the top of a high hill near the Bay of Islands. 
73. – A Lobelia, n. sp., found at the foot of dry clayey cliffs near Matapouri, on the E. Coast; in Decr. 1839, and again, in March, l841; this pretty little plant must speak for itself; I have never observed it in any other locality, and, as far as I know, it is entirely new. 
74. – Another Lobelia, common on moist sandy banks a little above highwater mark; all along the Coast, where it is found procumbent and creeping, growing together with Triticum repens. 
75. – A memento of a small weak plant, growing in the alluvial sides of the fresh-water river which falls into Ngunguru. Fructus et flores nullum vidi. March,/41. 
76. – A little procumbent plant, (all I could collect with any fruit,) from under a Metrosideros tomentosa on a rocky cliff in Wangarei Bay. March, 1841. 
77. – From banks of Ngunguru river. I have also seen it at the Residency, in the Bay of Islands, but am in doubt as to its being truly indigenous. Spergula. – 
78. – A small plant from a bog near Wairua, March, 1841, [Geophila dichondræfol.]
79. – A ditto ditto, (Soliva tenella,?). 
80. – A species of Gaultheria; which, if not G. fluviatilis A. Cunn., is, doubtless, a new sp. Margins streams, B. Islands. 
81. – Hymenophylla, from a dense wood near Wangarei, March, 1841. 
82. – Specimen of a small Ranunculus from a bog near Wairua  [Hydrocotyle]
83. – Ditto ditto, from Owae, on the E. Coaat,
84 A n. sp., of Microtis, found on the high and barren hills near Wangarei. Differing from M. Banksii, not only in appearance, but in its time of flowering, this coming out in the autumn, that in the spring. This is also smaller and its flowers are beautifully & delicately coloured with crimson and purple; whilst those of M. Banksii are green, or greenish yellow. Its sheathing fistulous scape, too, is not so long as its spike of Inflorescence, while in M. Banksii, it is a very great deal longer. The flowers of this n. sp., are often coalesced together, and are not so numerous as in M. Banksii. I subsequently found this, (on returning) on the high table land near Owae. The dry specimens are from the former, those in acid from the latter place, March, 1841. 
85. A Cardamine from the banks of the River Wairua. At first, I supposed it to be a new sp., but after all it is likely to prove to be C. debilis, or a variety of that sp. 
86. A little Carex-like thing from a bog, new to me. 
87 Sundry orchideous Plants, (same as sent in former package.) and a little Rumex-like plant from Nihonui, Bay of Islands. Possibly the same as No. 37. 
88. A sp. of Labiatæ, from sheltered spots near Owae, E. Coast; this may prove to be merely a variety of No. 59. [Micromeria]
89. Barren fronds of plant in acid, (vidi phial, labelled, 89.) from sides of Ravines & deep clayey watercourses, Bay of Islands. Rather a difficult matter to obtain a specimen in fruit, l840. 
90. A Chenopodium from rocky cliffs; E. Coast. 
91. A small Trichomanes from dense woods in the interior. 
92. A plant from a bog near Wairua. March, l841 [Myriophyll. n. sp.]
[Gunnera monoica]
93 A small Trichomanes which I hope will prove a n. sp. From dark Ravines, dense forests in the interior. March, l841. 
94 & 95. Two small plants, found growing together on alluvial banks, Head of Waikare River, By. Islands. 
96. Asplenium, n. sp.? from the sides of a brook near the head of Waikare River; the only place in which I have hitherto seen it. Decr. 1840. 
113 Part of a Frond of a splendid new sp. of Todea, from Tongariro, (the mountain mentioned 60-71.) Of this beautiful Fern I had but a single sp., which was fastened into my Box of Filices; I have, however, cut it in order to send you a portion, which I have also placed on paper, shewing the relative situation the Branchlets sent held with reference to the Frond; the exact size of which I have thereon roughly outlined. The lower part of the stipe is hirsute, like that of T. pelludica; of which latter sp. I also send you new specimens. Todea superba, W.C., 1839. 
114. A graceful creeping Hymenophyllum, from trunks of living Trees in dense forests, head of Waikare river, Bay of Islands, 1841. 
115. Triplicates of 97?
These two incipient Fronds I obtained from a prostrate (yet living) arborescent Fern, in the Waikare forest, At first sight I took them for a n. sp., they may however, prove but fronds of Cyathea medullaris, to which sp. the habit of the Fern in question bore great resemblance. If so, this is the largest I have ever seen, measuring 42 feet in length: as it lay (i.e. from the end of the trunk to its apex, exclusive of the petioles of its fronds.) It had been recently felled by a native, who also lopped off its leafy honours: it had however subsequently shot forth others (those now sent) while in that situation. Decr, 1840. 
116. A specimen of a Fern from the high Dammara range near the E. Coast. I regret that I was obliged, in this part of my Journey, to travel at a much quicker than a Botanical rate. The Fern, whence I obt. this spn., was coalescent; its fronds 3 feet in height, Apl. /41. 
117. From dry woods, E. Coast, Apl. 1841. 
118. This elegant Trichomanes (the largest hitherto observed by me in New Zealand.) was found on decayed Timber in a dense Forest near Wangarei. I sought for a long while, are I could find a frond in fruit, I was at length rewarded with one, which I send you, A very handsome and graceful light green Fern, in its fresh state, March, 1841. 
119. – A mem. of a Fern from a boggy stream at Horotutu, Bay of Islands, 1839; only observed by me in that locality. Very difficult to find a fruitful frond.
120. – A Lycopodium, n. sp.? from a bog near Kaitaia Station; procumbent & creeping; March 1839. 
121. – A n. sp. of Adiantum, from dry slopes, woods, B. Islands. 1839. I sent this to A. Cunningham, naming it A. falcatum W.C. 
122. – A Cænopteris from rocks near Owae. C. flaccida, only grows on trees; still this may be merely a variety of that sp., stunted, &c, from situation. 1840. 
123. – Specimen of a fern from a cleared wood, close behind the Wesleyan Missn. Station, on the banks of the Hokianga River. March, 1839. 
124. – An Aspidium, from dry sloping banks, E. Coast, 1840. This may prove to be A. velutinum A. Richard. 
125. – Truncheon from a stalk of Dicksonia squarrosa, Sw., from Waikare forest; native name Ẁeki. These stately ferns are often to be met with in groups of from 10 to 40; the average height is from 6 to 10 feet. 
126. – Portion of a stalk of Cyathea dealbata, Sw., from a wood near this settlement. This Fern is the most light and airy of all the arborescent species; in appearance much resembling the palms &c commonly depicted in all Oriental scenery. At Owae, on the E. Coast, I sent my little Native lad, Ruru, to the top of one, in order to ascertain its height; he gained the apex and sat rocking like a monkey on its crown; the line he sent down I accurately measured and found it to be more than 38 feet in length! An owl is often to be found umbrageously secluded from “Sol’s glaring eye”, perched on the petiole of one of its fronds. At Matapouri, on the E. Coast, I saw one in 1840, which branched off, at 4 feet from the ground, into 3 branches, each branch being about 4 feet in length, and bearing a fine head of fronds. Native name, Ponga. – 
127. – The major part of a Petiole from C. medullaris Sw., from a wood near this station. This sp. is the most elegant and splendid of all the Tree Ferns. Often its fronds form a most graceful droop of 18 feet; and when in a situation to be viewed to advantage (as it often is by the side of a purling rill of delicious water,) it presents a most lovely object to the entranced gaze of the beholder. The stalk seldom grows high; yet I saw one, near Wangarei, which was from 12 to 14 feet from ground to the springing of the petioles. – and, should the (doubtful) one I saw prostrate in Waikare forest, prove to be of this sp., [vide, sheet 115.] it then will be the tallest I have yet noticed; that measured 42 feet in height! The pith of C. medullaris is eaten by the New Zealanders, and is one of the best and most nutritious of all their indiginous articles of food. They call it Korau in the N. parts of this Island; at the Sd. it is known by the name of Mamaku
128. – The Coalescent Stalk & petioles of Asplenium pennigerum, Sw., from the banks of a rivulet, in the path hence to Wangaruru Bay, E. Coast. This Fern, in congenial situations near streams, often presents this arborescent appearance. 
129. – A Petiole of the Para of the New Zealanders, with a portion of the substance attached, which is (or rather, was) eaten by them. This is the petiole of the fronds from whence the specimens sent were cut. I have supposed it to be a sp. of Marattia, and probably M. elegans, Endl. – a very scarce fern, perhaps from its being formerly so much sought after as an article of food by the Natives. It only grows in the deepest recesses of the forest, where, by the sides of streams, the fronds attain a large size. It is remarkable for the joint-like process by which the frondlets are attached to the stipe, which in its living state, act as joints, allowing the frondlets to play up & down with every breeze of wind. I forwarded specimens to A.C. in l839. – In woods, on the E. Coast, near Owae. 
130. – Lomaria Fraseri; this pretty fern often, in humid woods, assumes an arborescent appearance. In returning from Wangarei Bay, in 1840, I passed through a dense and wet forest, where this graceful Fern abounded. I gathered two specimens. (one of which I now send, the caudex of the one I have by me measures 9 inches more in the length than this one,) and wishing to preserve them entire I carried them both myself for many a weary mile through thick jungle and forests; sometimes protecting them by the flag of my coat, sometimes with my body, from Rubus and other shrubs which seemed determined on destroying my prizes; – and am now most happy in sending you one in a perfect state. 
13l. – A phial; containing Peperomia Urvilliana, A. Richard, in spirit. A common plant in sheltered situations, rocky cliffs, Bay Islands. 
132. – Must speak for itself; sundry Fungi; flowers of Freycineta Banksii: &c, &c,
133. – This phial contains what I believe to be the true Larvæ of Sphæria Robertsii. These Larvæ are abundant in their Season on the leaves of the Convolvulus edulis? (the Kumara of the New Zealanders,) to the great annoyance of the Natives, who plant this root as a main article of food, and whose occupation at such times is to collect and destroy them, which they do in great numbers. They vary a little in colour, as the specimens, now sent, show. The Natives call them, Hotete, and Aruhe, (the same names which they give to Sph. Robertsii, and always speak of them as identical with that Fungus. The cormnon belief is, that both these (on the Kumara) and those (which bear the Fungi,) alike descend from the clouds! arising, doubtless, from their sudden appearance and countless numbers. 
134. – A moth from the Larvæ, No. 133. I have fully satisfied myself as to the genuineness of this Insect. In 1836, I kept the Larvæ under glasses, feeding them with the leaves of the Kumara (much to the annoyance of the Natives) until the perfect Insect was produced. There can not reasonably be a doubt but that this Insect deposits her eggs on the Branches of the Rata, (Metrosideros robusta, A.C. ?) (beneath which Tree only the Sph. Robertsii has hitherto been found,) whence they fall to the Earth beneath, die, & the Sphæria is produced. I think I can offer a fact, for consideration, relative to their being only found beneath M. robusta. On a fine evening, in last summer, I was, as usual, enjoying a promenade in my garden. The Sun had just set, and I was occupied in remarking the splendour of some fine plants of Mirabilis, which had just unfolded their scarlet petals; when, suddenly, several of these Moths made their appearance, darting about the plants in every direction, pursuing one another, and eagerly striving to obtain the honey which lay in the bottom of the of the perianths of the Mirabilis. From the plants they flew up to the flowers of a stately Agave (A. Americana,) where, being joined by other moths, their congeners, their numbers soon increased, and thus, every evening, during the whole season, they continued to enjoy themselves. Now, the inference I deduce is this, That, the M. robusta, flowering at this season, and having scarlet flowers, which abound in honey, becomes the centre of attraction to these Insects, increased too, by its densely-crowded cona of inflorescence. More particularly so, from the Flowers always being at the extremity of its branches; from which, and from their colour, this Tree may always be distinctly recognised from the other trees of the forest, even when at a great distance. The Larvæ, on which the Sphæria is found, when first taken out of the Earth, is white internally, and both breaks and cuts with ease; and appears, solid and succulent. A finely-cut and thin slice, when held against the light presents a beautiful appearance
The mosses, &c, are roughly numbered, for your greater convenience in a future reference concerning them. They must speak for themselves. Hitherto, I have not been much in the habit of collecting them, as my old friend and Botanl. correspondent cared little about them. No 110 (?) a large woody fungus, found in damp woods on living Trees and fallen Timber, gives out, in drying, a peculiar black powder. No. 111, I found on the summit of the highest ridge of hills near Wangarei Bay: whilst there, enjoying the noble prospect before me, I thought on you, and gathered it purposely for your collection. 112, I obtained from a bog near Wairua, in the same journey; March, l841. 
I trust, my dear Sir William, that your patience is not quite exhausted with the excessive tediousness of my very prolix epistle through which you have been for some time wading. Just allow me to make a remark or two more, and I must close. – 
I have always considered Niphobolus rupestris, and N. bicolor, to be but one species, and am happy to find that A. Cunningham has also expressed the same opinion, (vide, “Comp. to Bot. Mag.,” vol. II p.363.) his remarks are worthy of observation. I think my specimens now forwarded will also satisfy you on this point. Doodia aspera, and D. caudata, I am also constrained to look on as being but one sp. I have sought most diligently, and have seen thousands of living specimens,) for it is one of the commonest Ferns we have, and am still of opinion, that they are but one; having often seen them both on one plant. The plant is very irregular in its growth, seldom meeting with 2 fronds exactly alike. Possibly the error may arise from considering the two sp, as belong. to N. Zealand. A.C. gives no description of them in his Precursor; and, by his silence on the latter sp., evidently seems to say that neither himself nor his Brother had ever noticed D. caudata (as a distinct.) in 
N. Zealand. 
In Waikare wood, on Decr, 3l/40 I measured the trunk of a living Fuchsia (F. excorticata, Forster,) and found it to be, in girth 33 inches, and in height 21 feet. 
A Coriaria sarmentosa, Forst., which I saw at Wairua, measured, in girth, 34 inches, and another, which stood close by, 23 inches. –– 
On the banks of the R. Wairua was formerly a tree, the lower part of which was a Kahikatea, (Dacrydium excelsum,) and the upper a Manoao, (my new pine.) This, for a number of years was highly venerated by the Natives, who regarded it with superstitious respect. Lately, however, the upper part died, though the lower is still living. I did not see the Tree myself, but the Natives of these parts, have, viva voce attested to the truth of it. I believe them, for they are much more accurate in their observance of such things, than we are commonly willing to give them credence for. 
I intend to forward a Cabin of living Pines pr first vessel direct hence to England. Should I not hear from you in the interim, I shall consign them to the Loddiges, and to their disposal, subject only to your refusal. When I so send I shall take the liberty of informing you of their departure. 
You must, my dear Sir William, have perceived how very often throughout my letter, I have hesitated to speak positively, concerning many described and well-known plants. Now, this, to me, is most irksome. When I wrote you last, I wrote a Bookseller with whom I deal, for some Botanl. works, which, from some mishap or other, have never yet arrived. I cannot again order those Books until I hear from him, for it is possible that they may be near at hand. But, I would still further thank you, if you could kindly procure and send me (though the Church Missy. House,) some good and useful Botanical Work, as a Book of Reference, a kind of Index Generum. I have “Lindley’s Introduction” and “Natural System” (?) but find it of little use to me, as it says nothing whatever concerning the Generic char. of plants. Brown’s Prodr., Forster’s ditto, Endlicher’s Prodr. N. Isld. and the future Nos. of your “Enumeratio Filicum” (of which I have been favoured with the two first,) would be of great service. I see there is a little new Work by Newman on the British Ferns which I should be most happy to possess. For this purpose I enclose a Draft on our Socy. for £10, which you will kindly lay out for me, in the purchase of such works as you may deem useful. For although my time is fully employed, yet as a recreation I am passionately & increasingly attached to the Science. I confess I feel more disposed to give my attention to the Ferns, Orchideæ, Mosses, & Lichens, than to plants of the Exogenous Class. 
I won’t fail to remember to procure a good specn. of Phormium tenax for you when the season comes round; I send you, in this lot, a poor specn. of the same. It is rather a difficult matter to get the flowers, &c, of this plant to dry well. I believe I have discovered a 2nd. and very distinct sp., which I have, at present, thriving in my garden. I wait, however, to see it flower. 
I hope soon to hear from you: – I much wish to see those little Orchideæ delineated, with your able description. I intended giving you a quotation or two from poor Cunningham’s last letter to me; very nearly, if not quite, the last he ever wrote! (Being dated, May 24/39, he died in the June following,) but I really must defer doing so till my next communication. 
Allow me to request, that when you send me the Books I have desired, to put up a few phials, tubes, corks for ditto, and some small chip boxes, and a gall. of sp. of wine in stoppd. Bottles. Don’t send to me by any vessel via Wellington (the new City that is to be at the other end of this Island,) packages may just as well be at Terra del Fuego. 
I hope to study A.C.’s able “Precursor”, ere I write you again, which I hope to do also at no very distant period.
A few weeks since we were honored with a visit from Lady Franklin, who (whilst looking over a portion of my collection,) informed me, that she had lately seen your son, Dr. Hooker, at Hobart Town, and that he was much gratified in finding the Moss which bears your name. I trust yet to have the pleasure of seeing your son at this place and shall be most happy to accompany him to that splendid natural Collection of Ferns and Mosses, which abound at the Kerikeri waterfall – a place, where the Cunningham’s, Baron Hugel, and others, have Botanized, overwhelmed with admiration at Flora’s profusion. 
I have lately been engaged in arranging my 
N. Zealand shells. I find that I have about 150 species, several of which I suppose to be unknown. As I should like to make known the little I have gathered, for the furtherance of Science – if you have any friend, who is a good and devoted Conchologist, and who has it in his power to make known his researches for the benefit of others, pray, introduce him to me, and I will soon send him a little work. Could you direct me to a useful Book, on the Conchology of these parts?
And now, my very dear Sir William, I must indeed conclude. – I little thought, when I commenced, to write you such a volume. Pardon my numerous Botanical inaccuracies, for I am but in my noviciate – a Telemachus without a Mentor – Accept the few specimens sent – and, believe me
   			Ever most sincerely & attachedly yours,
William Colenso

P.S. May I still further encroach on your kindness, and be allowed to request you to purchase me, either, Smith’s “English”, or, your “British” Flora? as a Book of Ref. for Eng. Botany. Whichever work of the two you may consider as likely to he most useful to me. Together with your “Introduction to Botany”. I also want Nos. 1, 2, and 4, to complete the “Annals of Nat. Histy.” – the last No. of which is 25 – I should wish to have the remaining Nos. of that vol. (IV) so as to complete it. And to become a Subsr. to your “Journal of Botany”; the last no of which recd. by me, is 15. All Books intended as Referential I should wish to have bound in plain calf. I trust I need not say that any little outlay you may make on my a/c I shall most cheerfully repay, with many thanks – 
Forgive me, my dear Sir William, for thus cramming you with agencies of this nature, and permit my peculiar situation in such a land as this in some measure to apologize for my so doing. –– 
W.C. 
July 26/41,	
P.S. /2nd. /29th. Am now about to send the case on board, and close this letter. Have written our agent in Sydney, (Campbell & Co. to whom, if you should ever have an opportunity direct from Glasgow, please direct on my account,) to pay great attention to the re-shipping of the Case. I should like, if possible, to see a portion of De Candolle’s Prodromus;. which I perceive to be so highly, and, doubtless, very deservedly, spoken of. I see there is a small work published, by Lindley, on “the Vegetation of the Swan River Colony”, – if this is obtainable pray procure it for me also. 
Once more, then, my dear Sir William, I bid you Farewell! – May the specimens sent reach you in safety
W.C. 

A note at the bottom of the letter, presumably in Hooker’s handwriting, lists the following:
Books sent to Mr. Colenso By April 18. 1842,
1. Don’s Brit. & Gardening 4 vol. 4to. 
2. De Candolle’s Prodr. vol. I-VI Emend. & interleaved
3. Hook Brit. Flora. vol. I. ed 4 & 5
4. Icones Plantm. Parts 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12
5. Musci Exotici 1. 2. 8vo. 
6. Journl. of Bot. 15-32 & suppl. complete. 
7. Do, New Series Nos. 1-4. 5-13. 14. (15. 16. 17. 18. by Mr. Chapman. 

Jan. 27. 1843. 
8, Bot. illustrations ed. l. 
9. Do. 	Do. 	ed. 2. 
10. Med. of D. of Bedford. 
11. Willms. Journl. of Norway
12. Genera Filicum (……?) VI. VII. VIII. IX. X. XI. XII. 
13. Ann. of Nat. Hist. Nos, 1. 2. 4. 26 & 27. 
14. Smith’s Intr. to Bot. by Hooker. 
 # 
August-September 1841 (to JD Hooker)

Paihia Station,
Wednesy. Morng. 

My dear Sir,
Many thanks for your kind remembering me with Endlicher, which, by the bye, I have scarce time to look into. I rejoice at your finding 3 Rubus, besides R. australis, and hope they may prove distinct & well defined species. I think on examination your Pteris will prove a Lindsæa, and one, too, long known to the writer (who first found it in that very locality) & sent by him to your Father. 
With reference to your kind Invitation, to pay you and your gallant Bark a visit today, I fear I must refrain from doing so, independent of what the weather may prove, for if I take today; I must, of necessity, give up Friday, which I should be sorry to do, as I hope to have the pleasure of your company on that day. I hope, also, to see you tomorrow, either from 8 to 12, morning, or from 2 to 6, evening, as I have a half a day to spare. If you should not come this way by 10, and the weather permits, I shall conclude you won’t give me a call ’till the afternoon, and shall proceed to Kororareka, the village opposite, where I have some business to transact. 
I have, however, set down in the Book of Remembrance, next Monday or Tuesday as the day in which I hope to visit the “Erebus”. – It is very unfortunate that I should be so pressed for time just now, and doubly so, too, as I have to leave things in such a state next week that the work, over which I have the charge, may proceed in my absence. 
Pray, my dear Sir, when you come tomorrow, bring the 1st or last of De Candolle, with you; and your 2 pair specs. that I may seize the present opportunity of giving a fair trial to their lenses. 
Believe me
Yours very truly
W. Colenso

 # 


Paihia		
Wednesday
J. Hooker Esq. 
&c &c &c. 

My dear Sir
I hardly know what apology to make, for my not having ere this visited your ship; but my very numerous and onerous duties will, I trust, plead my defence. I am in hopes of seeing you tomorrow; which day and Friday I have as it were located for the pleasure of your company – pray come as early as you can. Should the weather be fine, I think we had better make the most of it, (seeing that both you and I have duties to perform,) and proceed to Kerikeri waterfall, returning the Friday evening. I have but 2 hands, as rowers, but if we start early we shall be able to get on with my small boat. Should however, the wind, &c, prove unfavourable, we can proceed to some other suitable spot nearer home. 
According to appointment, I must leave for the Coast on the 15th. Sept., consequently, considering your only having one half of the week at your disposal, we must make the most of our time. 
If you have a Generum Filicum at hand, pray bring it with you. I have but few Botanl. works, though I have some on order. 
If convenient let me hear from you by Bearer, as to whether you had made any other arrangements for tomorrow. 
I send you the letter I mentioned as having received from your Father, for your perusal, which you can return at your convenience. 
and am
My dear Sir
Very faithfully yrs:
W. Colenso

 # 


Paihia 		
Mission Station
Monday Eveg. 

J. Hooker Esq. 

My dear Sir,
Your kind offer to lend me Sprengel, Forster, & Brown, induces me to send my Boat, this afternoon, to fetch the same: as, busy though I am by day, I have an hour or two in the evening which I must make the most of. 
I hope your specimens from the Kerikeri have rewarded your indefatiguable research & patient endurance of cold & cramp & wetting – I am sure you will regret with me my loss, when I tell you, that all my specimens (from my late trip on the E. Coast) were destroyed by fire yesterday, through the carelessness of my lad who was in charge. Fortunately nothing else was injured. My poor lizard, too, died during our visit to the Waterfall; I have managed to preserve him in spirits. 
Is there a probability of my getting any Spirits of Wine from anyone on board the Erebus? –
I hope to see you on Thursday morning – but I intend writing you a Note (should I not see you here) on Wednesday – to inform you fully of our movements. 
Ever my dear Sir

Most truly yours
W. Colenso

 
Wedy. 
Eveg. 
JD Hooker Esq. 
&c &c

My dear friend
I have just returned from taking a stroll with Dr. Sinclair to your “Muddy-muddy” – and, in the course of conversation, have been given to understand, that in the 1d-Cyclopedia is a good article on Botany & Conchology – and, moreover, that you have the work – Now I won’t apologise for asking you to allow me a peep at it, and to bring it on shore with you tomorrow when you come this way – which, I am given to learn, will be ere Phoebus peeps over the Eastern hills. – Oh! never again think that you gentlemen of the R. N. have but little time to call your own – or, when you do so, think on the writer. 
I forgot to mention to you this evening, that I had just received No. 1 of the “Tasmanian Journal” from Henslowe – who again asks for “my” contribn!!
By-the-bye, I must get you to explain what you mean by an “amianthus-like moss on the ventricle of the stump.”
Excusez moi – 
Ever most truly yrs
	W. Colenso. 

 # 

Paihia,	
Missn. Station,
Thursday night. 
J. D. Hooker, Esqr. 
&c &c &c
    H. M. S “Erebus”

My dear friend
According to promise I send your Books to Dr. Sinclair’s in Lodgings; availing myself of the opportunity of sending a ½ doz. Stout and a Bottle Claret, for your use when Botanizing at the base (or peak) of Mt. Erebus, which I pray you to accept. Would that my Cellar allowed of my doing so in a manner more worthy of your acceptance. 
Our acquaintance, my dear friend, has been, indeed, brief! and that, too, under great disadvantages – but, believe me, I shall ever remember you; and though it is not probable that we shall ever meet on earth again, yet I endeavour to console myself with the hope of hearing from and corresponding with you. – You are going, my friend, to scenes of – perhaps – danger, but look beyond second causes, and ever put your trust in HIM, who stills the raging of the waves and holds the winds in his fist. May that Benevolent Being ever keep you! and may HE grant you a safe return to your Native Land, and a happy meeting with your Family and Friends! –
A Dieu, Hooker, A Dieu! Sometimes think on New Zealand, and on your
attached friend
William Colenso
C. M. 


26 July 1842
Paihia. July 26/42
Sir W. J. Hooker. 
My dear Sir William
Excuse and accept of a scrap – vessel under weigh and very busy. Get the enclosed seeds sown as soon as you can – 1, and 4, particularly. I am getting ready a Box for you; many new ferns, and specimens of other plants. Hope to send it off in a month and hope to hear too from yourself and ever-present son, soon. 
Once more, excuse this – shade of an apology,
and Believe me,
Very truly yrs,
W. Colenso. 
 # 


1 September 1842

JOURNAL OF A NATURALIST in some little known parts of NEW ZEALAND, by WILLIAM COLENSO, ESQ., in a letter to Sir W. J. Hooker. 
 
EVER since the publication of the celebrated Voyage of Captain Cook a lively interest has been felt in all that concerns the productions of New Zealand. Of late years that interest has been increased tenfold, in consequence of the rapid colonization of the islands by British Emigrants. Still, to the Naturalist, it has been very much a sealed country. Many of the plants collected during Sir J. Banks’ and Mr. Menzies’ visits are yet lying in our Herbaria unpublished; and the “Floræ Insularum Novæ Zelandiæ Precursor,”   of Mr. Allan Cunningham, edited by ourselves, partly in the “Companion to the Botanical Magazine,” and partly in the “Annals of Natural History,” enumerates only six hundred and forty species (including Cryptogamiæ), and these chiefly the products of the northern island and of the shores of that island. It has been remarked by Mr. A. Cunningham, “When we consider how little has been seen of the Botany of the northern island, notwithstanding that Europeans (engrossed truly in mercantile speculations) have now been settled several years upon its coasts; that the plants of the interior of its more expanded parts from the eastern to the western shores, which lie in the parallels of 38° and 39°, are absolutely wholly unknown, for no Botanist would deem it prudent to attempt a penetration, whatever his zeal may be, to its inland districts through which extirpating civil wars so extensively rage; when we glance at the map and perceive its snowy peaks, and especially that of Mount Egmont on the immediate western coast, the apex of which towers 14,000 feet above the ocean, whose waves wash its base, the upper part from the peak downwards to an extent of 5000 feet being clothed with eternal snows; in fine, when we reflect upon the fact, that (excepting at its northern shore in Cook’s Strait and at Dusky Bay on its south western coast) the Botany of the larger or middle island is, to this day, veiled from our knowledge, we cannot but exclaim at the rich store of vegetable productions which yet remains to be laid before us! For the “Precursor” contains perhaps but a tithe of what may one day be shown us; but a foretaste to excite our desires to behold what the future labours of Botanists may, it is hoped ere long, lay open to our eyes. Long since has that learned Botanist, Mr. Brown, remarked that the character of the New Zealand Flora known to us chiefly from the materials collected by Sir Joseph Banks, is to a considerable degree peculiar, although it bears also a certain affinity to those of the two great countries between which it is situated, and approaching rather to that of Terra Australis than to South America.” 
Since the period at which the above was written many plants from New Zealand have been communicated to me by Mr. Colenso, Mr. Edgerley and Dr. Logan, constant residents in the northern island; and Mr. Bidwill, Dr. Sinclair, Dr. Dieffenbach and Dr. Hooker collected during their casual visits: ─ I cannot give a better idea of the value of their communications than by saying that whereas no species of Beech tree had ever been known to inhabit this group of islands, four distinct kinds have been brought to light by these researches, and are already published in our “Icones Plantarum”.  Valuable as are the discoveries of all those gentlemen whose names are now mentioned, there is one of them who deserves more particular mention, Mr. Colenso, and who, if his health and strength be spared, and leisure from his arduous duties as a devoted Missionary be granted, will contribute still more than he has yet done to the elucidation of the Botany and Natural History, generally, of New Zealand. His continued residence in the Islands, his entire familiarity with the language, his acquaintance with the character of the Aborigines, his influence as one of the most energetic of the Church Missionary Society, his liberality and hospitality to visitors (as the officers of H. M. Discovery Ships, Erebus and Terror, can testify) and his frequent journies, all give him advantages which no other traveller there has enjoyed; and admirably does he take advantage of the facilities he thus possesses. The pages of this Journal and more especially those of our “Icones Plantarum” bear witness to many of the discoveries made by Mr. Colenso. We have lately received a valuable Monograph of several new Ferns of New Zealand from the same pen, published in the Tasmanian Philosophical Journal, an admirable Memoir on the Fossil Bones of a bird allied to the Ostrich which, together with the specimens of the bones themselves, I have placed in the hands of Professor Owen; – and now I have lately had the pleasure to receive the following letter, giving a most interesting account of a three months’ tour across the widest part of the northern Island, which was productive of still more botanical novelties, and which I am sure will be hailed with pleasure by every reader of this Journal. Great though the tide of emigration to New Zealand has been, the hills and the vallies are still clothed with their aboriginal vegetation: but ere the next generation shall have succeeded the present, its stately forests proved to be so valuable in yielding spars for the British navy will be levelled with the ground; and, as in St. Helena and other islands of limited extent, an exotic but naturalized vegetation will take their place; even the very animals now common will be extirpated. Already the majestic Cowdie, or New Zealand Pine is become scarce in many parts of the northern island, and that most remarkable bird, the Apteryx australis, is almost extinct. 
Very many of the plants alluded to in the following pages are here only mentioned by the numbers they bear in the collection sent to us by Mr. Colenso. Several of these have proved new: others require investigation and a comparison with specimens already existing in our own and other Herbarium, a work of much time, and I am unwilling to withhold the Journal from the public till such period as these plants could be named with accuracy. The circumstance is the less to be regretted, since the Botanist of the recent Antarctic Voyage, Dr. Hooker, is preparing a “Flora of New Zealand,” in which Mr. Colenso’s plants of the present Journey will be referred to according to their numbers. 

Paihia, Bay of Islands, 
New Zealand, September 1, 1842. 
My dear Sir William, 
Having recently returned from a three months’ tour among the natives in the little known districts of this island, and having been fortunate enough to obtain some Botanical specimens, among which it is hoped several new and interesting species will be found, I promise myself the pleasure of going over my collection and culling for you specimens therefrom; which will not, I trust, be considered altogether unworthy of a place in your valuable Herbarium. I have, I confess, hitherto postponed doing so in hopes of receiving some Botanical works of reference from England. I will not, however, delay any longer, choosing rather to trust to your charity to cover my numerous and egregious errors, than by waiting a still further indefinite period, procrastinate the pleasure which you, as a Botanist and a true lover of the science, will, I well know, experience on the receipt of the plants. 
As I may possibly have it in my power to make a few remarks, en passant, on the Natural History, Geology, Aspect, and Inhabitants of the districts which I traversed, I have decided upon throwing my observations into the form of a Journal; by which, too, you may the better be able to ascertain, in some degree at least, the Botanical Geography and relative situation of those parts. 
On Friday, November 19, 1841, I embarked at the Bay of Islands, in the schooner Columbine for the East Cape, (lat. 37° 7”) and, on the evening of Monday the 22nd, landed at Warekahika (Hick’s Bay), a small bay between Cape Runaway and the East Cape. The surf being very high on the beach, and the captain of the schooner wishing to proceed on his voyage (to Poverty Bay) with as little delay as possible, the wind too being fair, I was obliged to scramble on shore through the breakers as expeditiously as I could. In the course of the evening I was not a little chagrined to find, that the package containing the whole of my specimen paper, &c. &c., had, in the hurry of disembarking, been left behind on board of the vessel, which was now rapidly receding beyond the horizon! I had landed at this place five years before in my former visit to these parts. Although night was fast closing around me, (and I felt very much exhausted, having had three days of fasting through excess of sea-sickness), I noticed growing on the sand-hills near the shore, a small shrubby plant (1) with fleshy leaves and erect succulent stems; which, though not yet in flower, I supposed, from its 2-celled capsule, &c., to be a species of Euphrasia, probably E. cuneata, Forst.; that species having been found in similar situations a little further south, by Sir Jos. Banks, in 1869. 
The next morning I proceeded on towards Te Kawakawa, a village on the sea-shore, about six miles distant. In my way thither I found, growing in sheltered spots among the sand-hills, a pretty little decumbent compositaceous species (2) which was quite new to me. Ascending a high hill, and gaining its summit, I observed a graceful-flowered plant growing secluded among the tangled brakes of Pteris esculenta; at first sight I hoped it might prove Forstera sedifolia; but, on procuring specimens, I found it to be a Lobelia (3), probably L. littoralis, R. Cunn. At Te Kawakawa I remained a day or two, much, however, too busily engaged with the natives to move out in quest of botanical specimens. From the cliffs in the immediate neighbourhood I gained several marine fossils; these are chiefly imbedded in indurated clay and conglomerate. During my stay at this place, one of the heaviest hail showers fell that I ever witnessed. The hail was large and rhomboidal, the one half (laterally) of each stone was composed of clear, and the other half of clouded, ice. The oldest natives speak of only remembering one such shower. 
25th. – Leaving Te Kawakawa and travelling by the seaside, we passed several of the Taro plantations of these natives, (Caladium esculentum, Vent.). These plantations were in nice condition, and looked very neat, the plants being planted in Quincunx order and the ground strewed with white sand, to which the large pendulous dark green and shield-shaped leaves of the young plants formed a beautiful contrast: small screens, composed of the young branches of Leptospermum scoparium, intersected the grounds in every direction to shelter the young plants from the violence of the N. and E. winds. The visitor to this locality, travelling along the coast, is struck with the regular and pleasing appearance of the Pohutukawa, (Metrosideros tomentosa, A. Cunn.), which here forms a living and ever-green rampart between the sea-beach and the main-land; its roots and trunks, in many places, laved by the flowing tide. On these flat rocks of indurated clay I observed a peculiar kind of Alga (3α), which, boiled, is commonly used as an article of food by the natives of these parts: they call it Karengo. It grows large and quite procumbent; and is often dried up and caused to adhere to the rocks which it inhabits, through the great heat of the sun, after the ebbing of the tide. On the sandy beach near the East Cape I found a species of Triglochin (4) (T. flaccidum?) much finer than any I had hitherto seen. I did not (as in my former visit) go round the Cape, (a bold and high promontory, composed of indurated clay, reclining back in solemn grandeur, on the face of which, from the continual descent of debris from its summit and sides, nothing grows,) as it was near high-water; but striking inland I found, on a little sandy plain, a Veronica (5), which to me was quite new, and may possibly be a new species. It grew low and rambling, not exceeding 2 feet in height. Unfortunately it was not in flower; but after some little search, I obtained some spikes of the capsules of last season. About this time it commenced raining heavily, so I was obliged to give over botanizing. Our prospect, at this period of our journey, was anything but pleasant. Descending the side of a hill through a small water-course, I obtained a remarkably fine individual of Acianthus rivularis, A. Cunn., and also several specimens of a little plant, Myosotis, sp. 7, (6) with orbiculate or sub-spathulate leaves, and racemed flowers; I subsequently got the ripe seed of this. At night I pitched my tent at Te Pito, a small village three miles south of the East Cape. The rain continuing to pour down made us glad enough to obtain shelter any where; although in our present position, on the side of a very steep hill quite open to the South Pacific which rolled its immeasurable billows to our feet, both shelter and food were anything but obtainable. 
26th. – This morning the weather clearing I continued my journey. Ascending the precipitous hill near the bottom of which we last night bivouacked, we gained a wood, where I noticed a small tree of the Melicytus genus, with very long- lanceolate leaves (7), apparently a new species; this plant has very much the appearance of M. ramiflorus, Forst., but differs from that species in the shape and length of its leaves, some of which measured 10 inches, and in its taller manner of growth, averaging from 12-18 feet in height. On the summit of the hill I gathered a specimen of the foliage of a very narrow-leaved Veronica (8), but could not find a plant any where in flower. The view from the rocky summit of this eminence was very imposing. I noticed a tall plant of the order Compositæ (31), probably a Senecio, which was new to me; it grew to the height of 3– 4 feet among the young Leptospermum. Passing on, over the clayey hills, I gathered specimens of a fine Monocotyledonous plant (50), which I had not before observed; it flourished luxuriantly in this locality. Here, also, my new species of Phormium (P. Forsterianum) was very plentiful. At a short distance further on, I found a handsome Pimelea (32) in flower, a shrub of 2– 3 feet in height, possibly P. Gnidia, Vahl. of this fine plant I took several specimens, although I hardly knew how to preserve them from want of paper. Descending the hill through a slatey defile to the coast, I was rewarded with an elegant little monopetalous-flowered plant (9), a new species of Plantago (11), and a species of Mniarum (40): this last may prove to be M. biflorum, Forst.; these were all plentiful by the side of a little stream. I much wished to spend an hour at this place, but Rangitukia, the village where we intended halting for the night, and where we were to obtain a supply of food, was yet at a distance; the day, too, was rapidly passing away; so, with a sigh, which only Botanists know, I was obliged to proceed. The long stony beach was very tedious; we passed it, however, and turned again inland, up the valley of Waiapu. Our route now lay in the bed of the river at present dry, but in winter, judging from the appearance of the vegetation and stones about me, a mighty torrent. I noticed young trees of the Edwardsia genus very plentiful here, but whether a different species from the two present known ones, I could not determine. A Carmichælia, too, was very common, which appeared to me to differ considerably in habit from C. australis, in not being rigid like that plant, its branches being considerably more filiform and drooping; like the preceding, however, it was not in flower, and I could not ascertain whether it was a new species; notwithstanding, I took away a specimen for examination (7β). I have subsequently received some seeds from a friend residing in this locality, which from his description appear to be those of this plant. A shrub of the order Compositæ, and which I believed to be identical with Cassinia leptophylla, was also abundant here; of this also I obtained specimens for investigation (34). Reaching Rangitukia, we were heartily welcomed by the natives, who are here very numerous. At this village I remained a few days, but had not leisure to move out to look after a single specimen. In fact, I had scarcely time to eat or rest. 
29th. – This morning I left this hospitable village, and proceeded (as before) inland, up the dry bed of the river; the sun hot and insects very numerous, of which I gained several interesting, and doubtless, new species. I discovered on the banks of the river a new and peculiar species of Rubus; a shrub almost leafless, with only here and there a small leaf or two very sparingly scattered at the extremities of its youngest branches. It was about five feet high; branches very long, filiform, and much entangled; in colour a beautiful light green, thickly studded with orange-coloured prickles (51). The natives, who were with me, assured me that it bore red fruit in the winter season which the birds fed on. I much regretted that I could not detect any vestige of its flowers or fruit. Here I also found, (out of flower), two small cæspitose growing plants of the order Compositæ; of one of which, (29) called by the natives, Papapa, I found old flowers; of the other (30) I was not so fortunate. I also observed a small-leaved Epilobium (27), and another, a very beautiful species, (10α) without however either flowers or fruit. I subsequently found this last-mentioned species growing in rich profusion on the banks of the river Wirinaki far away in the interior, (vide sp. No. 188). Passing through the woods on the banks of the river, I observed some young trees with compound leaves (14), which were new to me; I could not then detect their parents, but I think I was fortunate enough to find them afterwards on the mountains in the interior, (vide, sp. No. 131). We soon arrived at Wakawitira, one of the largest native towns in New Zealand, where we remained a day or two. 
Dec. 1st. – Early this morning we left Wakawitira, the principal village of the Ngatiporou tribe. – I had proceeded but a few yards ere I discovered a very pretty procumbent Ranunculus, a new species (15) which grew here among the grass. At some distance further was a very fine grass (52) which flourished here, and another with black joints (53). In a grassy plain, a little beyond the river grew a curious little Lobelia (28), which I have reason to believe identical with one formerly discovered by me on the sea-shore of the East coast, and sent to you in 1841. Here also that pretty little plant, Micromeria Cunninghamii, Benth., was very plentiful (10). Proceeding hence towards the sea, through a long, irregular, and stony water-course, (which road I chose in hopes of meeting with something new), I found several mosses, (vide packet, No. 298). Emerging from the forest’s gloom we descended to the beach, over which we continued our course for a few miles, until we arrived at a small village called Wareponga. Here I saw a species of Clematis which appeared new; leaves were ternate, very coriaceous and glabrous, with the lower half only of each leaf greatly crenate. I fear that I must somehow have mislaid my specimens of this plant as I cannot find them; the fruit, however, I fortunately possess (54). On the rocks, in this locality, I noticed a species of Patella which sank the base of its shell considerably into the face of the rock on which it had fixed its residence; these rocks, as before, were composed of indurated clay. 
2nd. – It rained incessantly during the night; the morning however was fine, and I continued my journey. Our route, at first, lay along the beaches; but after travelling about four miles we arrived at Waipiro, a small village, where we breakfasted, and directed our course inland over high and craggy hills. At a little distance beyond Tapatahi, (a romantically situated village perched high on a precipitous crag), I found a new species of Fagus,? with small oval leaves (36); a timber-tree from 30– 60 feet in height. I had observed the tree in this very spot when passing here a few years ago; and had been looking out for it for several days; I did not, however, see a single plant of the genus until I came to the identical place where I had before noticed it. I had some difficulty in getting the natives to climb the trees to get me specimens, which, however, I procured, but not such as I wished. A little further on, by the side of a water-course, in a glen, I obtained two Epilobiums, one with large, thin, serrated, sub- rotund leaves (20), and the other, a smaller plant with oval leaves slightly serrate (20β). Proceeding onwards, I found a graceful Convolvulus with small leaves (37), which I believed to be the same as one, the foliage of which I sent four years ago to my late botanical friend Allan Cunningham, Esq. In descending to the sea, I observed a Pittosporum which I supposed to be P. umbellatum; still it looked so very fine that I could not refrain from taking a specimen (41); which since my return I have ascertained to be a distinct species; its place will, I think, be found between P. crassifolium and P. umbellatum. I noticed here, while resting on the turf, the great prevalence of smut (Uredo, sp.) on the common indigenous grasses; and also the extreme profusion of Edwardsia microphylla which every where abounded. At the north parts of the island this tree is by no means common, nor do I recollect ever having seen a single plant in any other locality than alone by the sides of rivers, and on headlands near the sea. A large species of Ranunculus (19) also grew in this spot. Towards evening I brought up in heavy rain at Te Ariuru, a large village in Tokomaru Bay; a spot which by the Naturalist will ever be contemplated with the most pleasant association of feeling, for here it was that Sir Joseph Banks and Dr. Solander first botanized in October, 1769. This bay was called Tegadoo by Cook. At this village I was obliged to remain a day or two, in consequence of the very violent gale of wind and rain which commenced on the night of my arrival, and completely imprisoned me within the canvass walls of my tent. On the ebbing, however, of the tide, I ventured to the rocks just below, and was rewarded with an elegant species of Patella, which being quite new to me and believing it to be undescribed, I have named P.Solandri: sending you, my dear Sir William, a specimen and enclosing a description. 
4th. – Early this morning I recommenced my journey. Our route being by the sea-side, the sea in many places laving the bases of the clayey cliffs, together with the extreme wetness and slipperiness of almost every thing from the late heavy rains made our walk very unpleasant. At Motukaroro, the S.E. headland of Tokomaru Bay, the huge bones of a large whale lay bleaching on the strand. Proceeding hence, about 3 P.M., we passed Waihirare, a beautiful waterfall which fell down a perpendicular sandstone cliff; the face of which, covered with Mosses and Ferns, appeared more than ordinarily lovely in this desolate and otherwise barren spot. I took a hasty glance at the vegetation in hopes of somewhat new, but could not discover any thing. Here on the rocks I gained another species of Patella, which differed much from those I had hitherto seen. At 5, P.M., we reached Anaura, a small village where we were very glad indeed to halt for our march this day had been most fatiguing. I observed, in the houses of the natives at this place, a quantity of a thick succulent species of Fucus hung up to dry which they informed me was used as an article of food, mixing it with the expressed juice of the fruit of Coriaria sarmentosa to give it consistency: this Fucus they call Rimurapa. 
6th. – Leaving Anaura and striking inland (in order to visit some natives residing on the banks of the River Uawa), we ascended some steep hills, on the summits of which I noticed several fine plants of Trophis, (T. opaca? Sol. ?) none, however, possessing either flowers or fruit. In a swamp near by I obtained an Epilobium (21), which was new to me; and in a wood a little further on I gathered specimens of several shrubs, or young trees (35), but unfortunately could not obtain any either in flower or fruit. Here a very graceful species of Metrosideros, with ovate-acuminate leaves (22), hung pendent from the trees; and another species in flower (13), perhaps one of those described by Cunningham. In the shady recesses of this wood I discovered a handsome species of Polypodium [P. sylvaticum, n. sp., W.C.] (55), together with an elegant Davallia [D. Novæ Zelandiæ, n. sp., W.C.] (56), the only Davallia hitherto found in these islands. Polypodium tenellum (57), here adhering to the trees, apparently varied, in the shortness of its pinnæ, &c., from the specimens I had noticed in the north parts of the island. An Epilobium (23), with very pubescent leaves and peduncles, which grew hereabouts in grassy places, I also secured. This plant as well as the former (No. 21) grew high from 12-30 inches. Arriving at the banks of the Uawa, at present a muddy rapid stream, swollen greatly through the late rains, I noticed a Lobelia (58) growing plentifully, probably L. angulata, Forst. After some little time spent in fording the stream (on the opposite bank of which Erpetion spathulatum, Don, was plentiful, but not in flower), we continued our journey until we arrived at Mangatuna, a small village, where, at the very pressing invitation of the chief we consented to remain for the night. In a wood close by I found an Orchis (16), the leaf of which I had often seen at the northward; but though I had frequently sought its flower, I had never been fortunate enough to obtain it. The flowering season of this, too, unfortunately was long past; I brought away, however, the capsule for examination. The next morning we left this little village and, recrossing the Uawa, proceeded over the alluvial plains which form its banks towards the sea. In this morning journey I obtained two species of Epilobium; one (12) with large ovate leaves, adpressed on the stalk; the other (12α) with long lanceolate leaves. I also got specimens of a pretty little decumbent plant (42) in flower and fruit. At 2 P.M., we reached Hinuroro, a large village on the seashore at the mouth of the Uawa River. This bay, or rather open roadstead, is the Tolaga Bay (in 38° S.) of our illustrious circumnavigator, Cook. Here his ships were at anchor in October, 1769; here, too, it was that “the first Knightia excelsa, Br., was seen, and the first Areca sapida, Sol., was cut down for the sake of its top.” And here, near the S.E. headland of the bay, Cook dug a well for the supplying of his ships with water; which well is shewn at this day by the natives to the curious “white man” travelling this way. 
9th. – We recommenced our journey this morning, crossing the Uawa, at its mouth, in a canoe. Our route, at first, lay inland, thence we turned towards the sea. Descending a high hill near the coast, I was both gratified and rewarded in finding an elegant little Arthropodium in flower, quite a new species (18); I only observed the plant in this locality, although I sought it assiduously during the remainder of my journey as I wished more specimens. Close by it grew a very handsome shrubby Pimelea (24), which, to me, appeared to be a new species, and distinct from the one numbered 32. Proceeding on, over the long sandy beaches, we were soon overtaken with rain, from which we endeavoured to shelter ourselves under some fine trees of Corynocarpus lævigata, Forst., which often grow in clumps near the seashore; but the rain continuing, we were obliged to proceed. From some natives whom we met, I obtained a basket of Haliotis, the black fish of which my baggage-bearers ate raw, with great zest. On the shells I found a peculiar little Patella, identical with a species discovered by Dr. Jos. Hooker, at Auckland Island. At four P.M., we arrived at Parinuiotera, the high bluff promontory, commonly known from its appearance at sea, by the not inappropriate though quite unclassical appellation of “Gable-End Foreland.” This remarkable headland, not less than 200 feet in perpendicular height, is entirely composed of white indurated clay, on whose face and sides grew not so much as a single moss or lichen, from the continual crumbling down of the clay of which it is composed. Here, in the pelting rain, beneath this towering crag where we could scarcely stand on our feet, owing to the extreme slipperiness of the clayey rocks, we found that the tide had not sufficiently receded to allow of our passing onwards without hazard. As, however, the evening was drawing on, and we had still some distance to travel ere we should meet with either food or shelter, we were necessitated to make the attempt. Scrambling, in some places, on all-fours, like a cat, and upborne by my faithful natives, I rounded this cape, through the breakers, passing under a natural archway in the rocky cliff, a thing of common occurrence, in similar situations, in New Zealand, and reached in safety, though wet, and cold, and hungry, the other side. Continuing my march, I picked up several specimens of Algæ which were new to me (59). At six P.M., we arrived at Pakaræ, a small village, containing about twelve persons, who, according to their custom, heartily welcomed us although they had not a scrap of food to give us. The old chief kindly pulled up three stakes from the fence of his little city as tent-poles for my tent, for trees there were none in this neighbourhood, and presented me with a dead craw-fish which I was happy enough to obtain, and divide among six of my party, including myself, as a substitute for supper. Next morning we started early, (having procured a basket of sweet potatoes for our breakfast, which were fetched during the night from some distance) travelling, as yesterday, by the sea-side. At two P.M., we halted to roast a few potatoes for our dinner which afforded me an opportunity of straying about a little, after specimens. In doing so I was fortunate enough to obtain Euphrasia cuneata in flower, which was abundant here on the clayey cliffs, and three species of Compositæ, two of them quite new to me. I had previously noticed the leaves of one, a curious little plant, in the slatey defile, near Waiapu, where I obtained the small Plantago (11), and other plants; the leaves and stalk of this plant (39) were covered with a viscid substance which exuded from its glandular pores. Another (25) grew commonly about the bases and faces of the low clayey and sandy cliffs, and often attained the height of 4 or 5 feet. The third (46), a Composita, was found in similar situations and of the same height as the preceding. The peculiar glaucous leaves of this last, so much resembling those found on the flowering stems of many varieties of Brassica oleracea greatly attracted my notice. Here, also, procumbent upon the sand, grew a small plant (44), somewhat resembling in habit and general appearance Tetragonia ex- pansa, but differing in the fruit, the berries being large, succulent, pimpled, and dewy, and filled with a carmine-coloured juice; this juice is used by the natives in writing as a substitute for ink; but like most other simple vegetable dyes is very evanescent; the natives call it Kokihi. Here, too, I noticed a Chenopodium (38), which, I think, I must have sent you before. A Linum (17) which appeared to differ somewhat from L. monogynum, at least in size, I also discovered in this locality; with a small, straggling, procumbent plant (48), which at first I supposed to be Anchusa spathulata, Rœm; but Cunningham, I find, describes that species as possessing “folia ovata obtusa,” which this one has not; to that family, however, it belongs in common with its ally the plant numbered 6, already mentioned. Having hastily gleaned this neighbourhood, we once more struck inland. The little decumbent plant (2), first seen at Warekahika was common here on the sand-hills near the shore. Leaving the sand-hills and proceeding on through a long swamp of Phormium, about five P.M., we reached the river at Turanganui in the inner N.W. angle of Poverty Bay, and crossing the river in a canoe made the best of our way for Kaupapa, a mission station, where the Rev. W. Williams resides; this place we reached by seven P.M., quite tired. The hospitable reception, however, which we received from Mr. Williams went far towards causing us to forget the toils of the journey. As the vessel in which I came to Warekahika had been to this place, one of my first inquiries was after my package of paper, and I was happy to find it safe in Mr. W’s keeping. 
At Mr. W’s I remained for several days, occasionally, when weather and duty permitted itinerating in the neighbourhood in quest of specimens. In the alluvial plains on the banks of the river, grew a plant of the Order Compositæ (47), possessing a very elegant coloured imbricated involucre. In the swamps, among Typha, I detected a curious little floating plant (33), which covered the whole surface of the standing water. Here, also, on the banks I procured fine specimens of a spiny shrub, of the order Rhameæ (49). I had noticed it when here in 1838, and got living plants, which unfortunately died in my garden at Paihia. Until this time, however, I had neither seen its fruit nor flower; it appears to possess characters indicative of its belonging to the genus Colletia, Brongn.; perhaps a new species of Discaria? It forms strong dense bushes, 2 to 4 feet in height, and would, doubtless, make an excellent fence; for which purpose I gathered a quantity of its seed, now nearly ripe. The natives give this plant the expressive name of Tumatakuru, i.e. literally, Standingface-beater. I also noticed a small linear-leaved Senecio (26), common here among the grass which appeared to me to be distinct from any species yet observed. On a hill in the neighbourhood, I procured fine specimens of a species of Cheilanthes (60), perhaps C. tenuifolia, R. Br., and in a damp wood, at a little distance, a fine and lovely Moss (45), which was quite new to me. I felt gre atly disappointed, however, in not being so fortunate as to find a single specimen in fruit. In this locality, too, a small Galium (43) occurred, which may possibly prove different from the two species noticed by Cunningham. I again observed in this neighbourhood that elegant Rubus already mentioned (51), but much in the same state as those previously seen at Waiapu; and I was rather surprised to find the Ngaio (Myoporum lætum, Forst.) growing here very commonly as a forest-tree, with a straightness and height unknown in the north part of the island. In the Bay of Islands and adjacent districts, M. lætum is an irregular growing shrub, or small tree, only found in the immediate neighbourhood of the sea; there, its wood is so small as not to be of any use, and is not even collected for the purpose of firing; while here, the tree attains the height of 30-35 feet, and is very commonly used by the natives for posts, poles, rafters, &c. I quite satisfied myself, however, of its perfect identity with the northern one. 
Dec. 20. – This morning I re-commenced my journey, directing my course for the first time directly into the interior. For some time we proceeded up the valley by the banks of the river over alluvial and grassy plains; and about two P.M., reached the forests at the base of the first high range of hills. Here, growing on the river’s bank, was a species of Compositæ (84) differing from any I had yet noticed. A species of Viola (82) occurred plentifully; but I could not obtain a specimen in flower. In a damp wood I discovered an elegant membranaceous-leaved Lomaria (265), [L. rotundifolia, n. sp., W.C.,] with fine specimens of another species of the same genus (266) which appeared a variety of the plant formerly sent by me to you, and figured in Icones Plantarum Tab. CDXXIX (L. lanceolata.) In pools in marshy ground, almost entirely submersed in water, I found a fine aquatic Ranunculus (99) with very long petioles. On the clayey hills and generally in dry elevated spots, I obtained specimens of what may probably be species of Celmisia (86). I think these will prove two distinct species, and different kinds of Anchusa, or Myosotis (81, 91) I also obtained in this locality. Ascending a hill I discovered a plant with copious verticillate inflorescence, and large subrotund leaves, with long succulent petioles (83). Most unfortunately I could not find a specimen possessing either seeds or flowers, although I sought most assiduously for such. It must have flowered very early in the season, as both carpels and peduncles in every specimen were quite withered; some flower-stalks were from 12-20 inches in height.  On a barren hill in this neighbourhood grew a Lycopodium (85) which I had not before noticed; together with a few mosses, (39, 94, 96). From these heights the prospect is most extensive. Beneath me lay Poverty Bay with its romantic headlands; while far away to the left, Hikurangi (the isolated mountain near Waiapu) hid his venerable head in clouds. The atmosphere, however, was so filled with smoke arising from the fern which was burning furiously to windward, that it was only with difficulty that I discovered a single distant object. We travelled until near sunset, halting for the night by the side of a small stream in a desolate wild, called by the natives, Tapatapauma. Here several species of the genus Epilobium flourished luxuriantly, of which I secured specimens, (vide Nos. 89, 93, 103, 104, 106, 107 and 109); Nos. 105 and 110 may, in all probability, be merely varieties of 103. This last, 103, grew most plentifully in tufts every where on these hills among the fern. The sides of the rivulet were ornamented with fine plants of a Fagus (88), which I think will prove distinct from the large-leaved species discovered by me in the more northern parts of the Island; the leaves of this species being rhomboid-ovate, upper half of the leaf serrate or sub-laciniate, much truncate, tridentate, and attenuated at the base, serratures, 11-13, acuminate or mucronate, petioles and whole upper surface of the leaf tomentose; while the leaves of that species, (discovered by me at Wangarei, and sent to you in July, 1841), are ovato cordate, serrate nearly to the base, truncate, subtridentate, serratures 15-21, and petioles slightly villous; leaves much larger and broader. 
21st. Rising early this morning I resumed my journey – and gaining the summit of the hill before me, I had an extensive view of the interior. Hill rose on hill, – Pelion on Ossa, in continuous succession far as the eye could reach. To the left was Wakapunake, an immense table-topped hill, of rather mountain; while far away in the distance to the right, a peculiarly precipitous mountain cast its bold outline in fine relief into the sky: this, my native guide informed me, was Waikare, to which we were going. Time, however, would not permit a lengthened gaze; so, descending the hill, we proceeded onwards. Here, among the short grass, a pretty little Ophioglossum (90) grew, which to me seemed to differ from those already noticed by Cunningham, and I first gathered also that very graceful fern, Lomaria linearis, n. sp., W.C. (267), which grew rather abundantly in one spot in those grassy dells. On the dry and barren summit of a high hill, I procured a peculiar little Compositæ (97); and shortly after discovered a specimen of Leptospermum (95) for examination; which I believe, from its foliage and general appearance, to be a new species. It here grows as a stunted shrub; sometimes, however, reaching 7-10 feet in height. In this neighbourhood I noticed a new and very distinct species of Coriaria (100), an elegant procumbent plant with undulated ovate-acuminate leaves. It seldom rises above two feet in height and is mostly found quite prostrate, and very abundant; disputing the possession of the soil with those very common occupiers, Pteris esculenta and Leptospermum scoparium. Among the fern it has a very peculiar appearance; and, at first sight, might almost be taken for a gigantic foliaceous Lichen overspreading the surface of the ground. I have named this species C. Kingiana, (in honour of my much respected friend, Capt. P.P. King, R.N.), and was fortunate in procuring fine specimens in flower and fruit. At Hopekoko, a small stream (where we rested awhile to dine on roasted potatoes) the bed of which at the ford was one flat block of sandstone, I procured a specimen of a pretty little Restiaceous plant (264), and also of a Hydrocotyle (162). Having feasted with hearty zest on our roast, we proceeded on our journey. We soon arrived at a small cataract, down which the water fell perpendicularly about twenty feet into a deep and dark basin. The only ford at this place was on the very slippery edge of the fall, (composed of a single mass of rock), over which I was obliged to be carried, for I dared not trust my own footing on that perilous and uncertain path, which forcibly reminded me of the bridge to the Mahometan Elysium. As it was, I very nearly fell, through nervous excitement, into the gloomy depth below. At a short distance beyond this, stream, and on its banks, I found another small Lomaria (268) (L. deflexa, n. sp., W.C.], and, in the same locality, a graceful species of Composita (98), the leaves of which I had before observed. In a deep swamp through which we had to pass, I found a large-leaved Epilobium (102), and on a little hillock in the midst of the swamp, a small Composita (142), which may prove but a finer variety of 97 already noticed. Passing onwards I obtained a species of Galium (101) and a Hydrocotyle (92), which appeared to be new. I also noticed the leaf of an orchideous plant (111) differing from any I had hitherto seen; it was, however, past flowering, so I was obliged to be content with a leaf or two as a memento of such a plant. About six P.M., we arrived at the banks of the river Wangaroa, (one of the principal branches of the river Wairoa which disembogues into Hawke’s Bay). Here I obtained two canoes from the natives, and paddled down the river about two and a half miles to Te Reinga, the principal village of the district. This river winds round the enormous hills of Wakapunake at the base of which the village is situated. I had often heard from time to time about this place from the natives, and the abyss-like cataract in its immediate vicinity, and had long cherished a hope of one day visiting it. Tired as I now was, I wished for morning that I might realize my desire, and gain a few more additions to the New Zealand Flora. The roar of the waters during the stillness of the night had much that was soothing as well as solemn in the sound. Morning broke, and, prayers and breakfast over, I entered into a little canoe and paddled about 200 yards to the bed of rock, which, crossing the river, dams up the water and causes the fall. This cataract, from its situation, is exceedingly romantic; the most so, I think, of any I have yet seen in New Zealand. The bed of rock, or rather deposit of indurated clay, sand and mud, of a very white colour, which here obstructs the progress of the river, (and through a narrow hollow in which the water rushes with fearful velocity) is filled with marine shells in a fossil state, although at a considerable distance from the sea and at a very, great height above its level. This bed of white rock is large, being not less than 200 feet in width, and, when the river is swollen, by the winter’s rains, surrounded as it is by high and densely wooded hills, the fall must present a very imposing appearance. I gained several specimens of shells, Uni- Bi- and Multivalve by digging them out of the rock with my hatchet. Among them were specimens of the genera Terebratula (Terebratula Tayloriana, n. sp.), Valuta, Pecten, Lepas, and others, at present unknown to me. The waters fell from, rock to rock three several times, ere they were swallowed up in the dark eddying gulph below. The deep gloom of the river in the gorge beneath, the different hues of the dense masses of foliage on either side, the sunbeams peering downwards through the tops of the trees, the enormous bed of rock above, white as snow, with the natives who accompanied me perched here and there upon the same, and the little village in the back-ground, contributed to give the whole an enchanting effect. In the height only of the fall was I disappointed. I attempted a hurried sketch, but could not do the scene before me justice. In fact, I had too many things upon my hands at once, consequently I did nothing well. I wished, afterwards, when it was too late, that I had remained a day at this place, instead of pressing on, post-haste, in the manner I did. I just glanced at the vegetation here, and obtained two specimens of white-flowered Gnaphalium, (80, 130) which I had not before seen. Returning to the village, and obtaining, though with great difficulty, guides and baggage-bearers, we again commenced our journey. Paddling up another branch of the river, named Ruakituri, for nearly a mile, we landed on the left bank. The sun was intensely powerful, not a zephyr playing, nor a cloud in the air, nor a tree which could afford us a shade anywhere at hand. Through unfrequented paths, (if paths such could be termed) up and down steep hills overgrown with the young fern, (Pt. escul.) which at this season is peculiarly disagreeable from the clouds of fine yellow dust with which it is loaded, and which, inhaled at every breath causes you incessantly to sneeze, we travelled until three P.M. many times halting by the way. Having roasted a few potatoes, on which we dined, I endeavoured to cheer my companions in travel, but to little purpose. We however recommenced our journey, and continued our march, through want of water, until after sunset. Fortunately I succeeded in finding some, by the side of which, in the wilderness we encamped; all too fatigued to care much about anything save rest. 
Oh! how often might I have exclaimed this day with the poet: – 
“ All-conquering heat, oh intermit thy wrath!
  And on my throbbing temples potent thus 
  Beam not so fierce! ————
                           ————In vain I sigh. 
  And restless turn, and look around for night; 
  Night is far off, and hotter hours approach.” 

I gained nothing new in the whole of this melting day’s horrid march; fern, fern, nothing but dry, dusty fern all around! I gathered, somewhere, in the course of the day a diseased branch of Haxtonia furfuracea (127) which was curiously distorted; probably caused by the punctures of insects. I have often noticed such deformities in various- plants, but, as far as I recollect, I never saw it so regular or so large before. One river, the bed of which we descended into and crossed, ran at the depth of from 30 to 80 feet below the surface of the soil on either side. 
23d. – At a very early hour we arose, and with stiff and unwilling limbs proceeded onwards. Want of food, in great measure, impelled us forward; as we had yesterday been led to suppose that we should reach the next village by night. After three long hours spent in active exertion, we reached Ẁataroa, a small village where we were heartily welcomed. Descending to this village, I gathered specimens of a Melicope (87), in fruit, a small but graceful tree, probably M. simplex, A. Cunn. Having breakfasted and rested awhile, we left this village, and continued our march, which, as yesterday, lay over high hills which rose in perpetual succession before us, appearing as if they were without valleys between. The country as we progressed into the interior became more and more barren; a scanty vegetation of stunted Pteris esculenta, Leptospermum scoparium, Leucopogon Fraseri and such plants alone existed on these dry and sterile spots; save where, in the deep glens between the hills, a clump of wood was to be found shewing their heads of foliage here and there like oases in the desert. The soil was dry and dusty, and principally composed of broken pumice. Towards evening, from the crest of one very high hill, we had, in looking back, a splendid though distant prospect of Hawke’s Bay, and the rugged and high land bounding the same. On the top of this hill I obtained specimens of a small tree, a species Weinmannia? (131;) a few plants of which were here scattered about. My native guides assured me that no person could keep his footing on this elevated spot when the south wind blows; an assertion, which the denuded and bare aspect of the place, together with the very stunted appearance of the few trees and shrubs on it, seemed fully to corroborate. Bivouacked for the night at Ẁakamarino; a little village on the banks of a small river. 
Early the next morning we recommenced our march towards Waikare lake; the old chief of Ẁakamarino accompanying us. An hour’s walking brought us to Waikaretaheke, a rapid stream of about 4 feet deep, caused by the exit of the waters of the lake towards the sea, and which here most outrageously tumbled over a long and sloping bed of rock. A bridge of trees, (one of the best-constructed native bridges I had ever seen,) was thrown across the foaming torrent; and, though strongly secured together, it seemed as if every rush of the bounding water would carry it away. A nervous person would not have hazarded himself on such vibrating and precarious footing. 
The beauty of the spot rivetted my attention for a few moments, and I almost determined to venture a sketch. I gathered a Moss (128) in this locality; and, a little further on, a fern (269), a species of Polypodium, [P. viscidum n. sp., W.C.] every frond of which was more or less covered with pappus, downy seeds, and other such light substances, blown by the winds. We soon arrived at the village, situated on a high headland, jutting into the northern side of the lake; the gateway of which was, as is often the case, embellished with a pair of huge and hideous clumsily-carved figures, besmeared with red pigment, and grinning defiance on all comers. The wind now blew so very strong, that it was not possible to cross the lake in such frail canoes as this people had at command; so I was obliged to pitch my tent here, although it was far from easy to find a suitable place, owing to the great unevenness of the ground, its unsheltered situation, and the very high wind. Here I was confined a prisoner until the morning of the 29th, when, the wind lessening, I effected my escape, crossing in safety to the opposite shore. I made, however, the most of my time whilst here, and was amply rewarded with specimens of new plants. First must be mentioned another beautiful species of Fagus (132), with small, broad, adpressed, coriaceous and biserrate leaves which grew plentifully in the immediate vicinity of the lake, and possesses, especially in its young state, most elegant foliage. Unfortunately, however, I could not find a single flowering specimen, although I assiduously sought for such, and hired natives to climb the trees in quest of them; a few capsules of the preceding year were all I could procure. The natives wished me to believe that this tree did not bear fruit every year, asserting that they had also remarked, that when this tree bore fruit, other trees did not! They call it Taẁai. It grows from 80-50 feet in height, and is not so robust as the large-leaved species. Here also the oval-leaved kind grew abundantly, attaining a considerable size and height. A graceful shrub, of the order Compositæ (122), with suborbiculate leaves, and sub-sheathing petioles, I found near the water’s edge, but in dry spots; and secured flowering specimens and fruit. This shrub grows in rather a straggling divaricated manner, from 2-3 feet in height. I am much gratified in having a fine young plant now living from seed sown by me on my return from my journey. On the sandstone rocks I found a beautiful minute Lobelia (263), a perfect little gem. It was scarce, and grew where it could only have been nourished by the spray and waves of the lake. Here also, among the rocks, was a species of Plantago with lanceolate leaves (126), new to me. A fine Hydrocotyle (123) I found in the same locality. Just above, on the banks, I gathered specimens in fruit of a peculiar (Araliaceous?) tree (125), which was common here: it grew in a straggling manner to the height of 25-30 feet. A large and new species of Coprosma (120), a small tree from 10-14 feet high, I also obtained in fructification; with a few fine Mosses (118, 156, &c.) Rummaging about among the dry and more elevated rocks, I found a pretty little fern (270), a species of Asplenium [A. Colensoi, n. sp. ms.]; and, on the top of the little promontory on which the village was situated waved a very handsome Dicksonia (271), [D. lanata, n. sp.,W.C.]. This elegant fern was abundant in this locality; some of the fronds were 24-30 inches in length. Had I not been very anxious to prosecute my journey, I might have spent an agreeable time at this romantic spot; such, however, was not the case. I was among a tribe noted for their reckless ferocity; to whom, secluded as they are in their mountainous retreats, a white man was indeed a stranger. They had scarcely any food for their own use; and although they exerted themselves to the utmost in their endeavour to be hospitable towards me, they could only allow us two scanty meals of roots and herbs per diem. 
I obtained from the lake some fine specimens of Unio, the only living thing (according to the natives) which inhabited its waters. I supposed the sheet of water to be about six miles in diameter, but could only guess at the probable size, owing to its very irregular shape. The lake is very deep and clear, and the bottom rocky. A peculiar sea-bird, called by the natives, Tété (which often flies irregularly at night, making a noise resembling tee-tee-tee-tee, rapidly uttered, whence its name) is sometimes caught here in large numbers. From the natives’ account, it would appear that these birds at certain times resort to the tops of the highest and barrenest hills, where the natives assemble and make fires on foggy nights, which fires decoy the birds thither, when they are easily taken with nets. I have often heard this bird at night, but have never seen one. It is, I think, highly probable that it may belong to the genus Procellaria. 
29th. This morning, the wind lessening, we hazarded a passage, and crossed in safety to the opposite shore. The “everchanging” woodland scenery appeared most lovely, as we, in our little canoe, wound round the bases of these everlasting hills. Here, for the first time, away from the immediate sea-coast, I noticed the littoral species of Metrosideros (M. tomentosa, A. Cunn.) It grew, however, in similar rocky situations close to the water’s edge, and after the same very diffuse manner. Parasitical on its branches, in great abundance, flourished Loranthus tetrapetalus, Forst. (112), gorgeously displaying its profusion of scarlet blossoms. On getting into shallow water, I obtained specimens of a graceful Myriophyllum (113), which was attached to the bottom of the lake, and grew completely under water to the length of several feet. We landed at the margin of a wood, the trees of which overhung the lake, where, at the pressing request of the natives who lived near I consented to spend the remainder of the day and night. As they did not, however, gather together until very near evening, I had a little time to botanize; and which, I trust, was fully used. It was indeed a lovely spot; that constant humidity, so requisite for the full development of the varied tribes of the Cryptogamic family in all their beauty, was ever present in these umbrageous solitudes. I commenced my search at the water’s edge; and first gathered specimens of a peculiar Rumex-like herbaceous plant (116) growing within the water. Close by, a small Myrtaceous shrub (115), clothed with Lichens and Jungermanniæ, attracted my notice; this shrub attained the height of 7 feet. A peculiar little Jungermannia-like plant (155) next entered my vasculum. Of Musci and Jungermanniæ I gained several specimens, many of which were fine and graceful plants (vide, 157, 158, 159, 175, 176, 164, 151, 152, 147, 135, &c.); among them, I hope some new species will at least be found. A beautiful foliaceous, though small, Lichen (150) occurred here on the trunks of living trees having spherical black soredia on its under-surface which appeared to me quite unique. Another species (172), bearing scutellæ on the edge of its thallus grew also on these trees. I here obtained five specimens of A. Cunningham’s new genus Ixerba (114), and in doing so almost dared to hope that I had gained a second species from its anthers being scarcely ovate, the style twisted its larger corymbs, containing 5-10 flowers; its lanceolate leaves, shorter and broader; its much larger size and robust habit attaining the height of 40-50 feet, and being too one of the commonest trees of these woods; in all which it differs from I. brexioides, Cunningham’s plant, which, in these particulars, is thus described by him: “Antheræ ovate acuminate. Stylus 1, angulatus, continuus, versus apicem attenuatus. Flores corymbosi, pedunculis (uncialibus) plerumque trichotomis. Folia elongata-lanceolata acuminata, 4-5 uncialia; (5-6½, W.C.) Arbor elegans viginti pedalis et infra. – A tree of very rare occurrence.” A.C. in Ann. Nat. Hist., vol. iii, p.250. – I also procured specimens of a new species of Coprosma (117), a graceful shrub, 3-6 feet in height, with oblong-lanceolate leaves and a species of Senecio?, which appeared new to me (129) with a peculiar plant (121), which I supposed to be a large Polytrichum? growing in dry spots; of this, however, I could not find a single specimen exhibiting either flowers or fruit. In this locality, I also gathered specimens of a species of Solidago (119), a small shrub, 1-3 feet in height, which, from habit and general appearance, I supposed to be distinct from S. arborescens, Forst.; and a fine shrubby Leptospermum (177), which may prove a new species. Here, also, I was so very fortunate as to obtain fine specimens of several new species of the beautiful genus Hymenophyllum. H. Franklinianum (272, n. sp. W.C.) a lovely creeping fern, pendulous on living trees, whose trunks it completely clothes with the exuberance of its fronds. I have done myself the very great pleasure of naming after that kind patroness of science, the Lady of His Excellency Sir John Franklin, &c. &c., Governor of Tasmania, who lately visited these Islands. 
H. pulcherrimum, (273, n. sp. W.C.) another beautiful and fine species, is also epiphytal on trees in the darker recesses of the forest. This is one of the largest species yet found in New Zealand, some fronds measuring fifteen inches in length. H. spathulatum, (274, n. sp. W.C.) a fine species, is parasitic on trees overhanging the lake. This fern exhibits a very peculiar appearance, from the circumstance of its having a number of black botryoidal masses on the edges of the segments of its fronds. I, at first, supposed I had discovered the type of a new genus; but, on examination with such means as I had at command, I conclude these masses to be the work of some insect. I noticed this species only to he so ornamented. H. atrovirens, (275, n. sp., W.C.) a small dirty-looking species found on wet rocks and stones in low shaded spots, is apparently very near H. flexuosum, R. Cunn., differing, however, in its involucre, &c. the involucre in that species being “orbiculate.” H. revolutum, (276, n. sp. W.C.) a small species, epiphytal on the reclining branches and trunks of trees, in damp and shaded places; in affinity very near H. Tunbridgense. The deeply laciniated margins of the segments of its frond, will, however, be found constantly revolute. After all it may prove but a variety of H. Tunbridgense, of which English species I have not an accurate description. The elegant little H. semibivalve (277) grew plentifully here on fallen and reclining trees. A handsome species of Polypodium (278) apparently a variety of P. Grammitidis, R. Br. but having its lobes deeply incised and sub-pinnatifid; and an elegant species of Grammitis, (279, G. ciliata, n. sp. W.C.) I also obtained in this locality. Both these ferns are epiphytal on living trees. G. ciliata has close affinity with G. australis, R. Br. from which, however, it differs in its being a much smaller plant, in having its sori more prominent and crowded, and in being villous underneath and beautifully ciliated at the margin. Several charming mosses (280) too, I gained during my very short stay here, among which I was very much pleased to find in fruit the very beautiful one whose fronds I had before detected in a wood near Turanga, (vide sp. No. 45). The mosses (280) must speak for themselves; I hope, however, that some new species may be found among them. 
The next morning I recommenced my journey; experiencing no little difficulty in the obtaining of a guide over the mountains, in which service I was obliged to enlist all my persuasive powers. We commenced ascending from the shores of the lake, through dense woods chiefly composed of Ixerba and Fagus. Having gained the summit of the range we found travelling easy; for, in these forests where the broad-leaved Fagus (No. 88) is the principal tree, there is but little underwood; indeed, plants seem as if they did not like the shade of these trees. One of the first things that attracted my attention this morning was a peculiar little plant (163) with succulent white berries, growing here and there at the foot of large trees, wherever the light decaying vegetable mould was deepest. I sought assiduously for perfect specimens, and was at length rewarded with them in flower and fruit: I have not met with any thing like it in New Zealand. A pretty shrub with an elegant leaf (171) abounded here; as did another shrub (165) possessing the habit of Myrsine, but neither of these could I detect in flower nor fruit. A new Orchideous plant sent in acid (262) I procured perfect specimens of from the foot of the trees in these woods; it grew, however, singly, and appeared scarce. The natives told us that we might expect rain on these mountains (they having a proverb to the effect that it is never dry in these parts) and so indeed it came to pass. 
After we had proceeded for about two hours it began to pour down in torrents; no shelter was at hand, so we were obliged to continue on in the cold and pelting rain. I much regretted the state of the weather, as I had every reason to expect new and rare plants in these elevated regions. The trees and shrubs large and small, were all beautifully festooned and draperied with Jungermanniæ and Musci, as if wound by fairy fingers, evidencing the eternal humidity of these forests. The family of Filices, too, presented the most lovely spectacle this day I ever witnessed. In these deeply shaded recesses, my enchanting Todea superba (281) and graceful Lomaria rotundifolia (265 ante,) flourished in perfection; the densely crowded and dark green fronds of the former contrasting so beautifully with the light-coloured and elegant membranaceous ones of the latter; their fronds grouped in ever-living circles of green, from 5 to 6 feet in diameter; many single fronds of either fern measuring upwards of 3 feet in length. With them grew two species of Aspidium; one, A. pulcherrimum, (282, n. sp., W.C.), a truly fine plant, is one of the most lovely ferns in New Zealand, many of its gracefully flaccid fronds measuring upwards of 4 feet in length. The other, A. Waikarense (283, n. sp., W.C.), is also handsome though smaller and much more rigid in its growth and habit than the preceding, having the lower divisions of its pinnæ, which are crowded, subimbricated on its rachis. Another new species of Lomaria (284, L. latifolia, W.C.), was growing in these spots; in affinity this fern comes very near L. procera, Spreng., from which, however, its solitary habit, broader pinnæ, which are fewer in number and deeply serrated and not decreasing in size downwards, sufficiently point out the distinction. I gazed entranced, notwithstanding the warring of the elements, upon these beautiful productions of nature, and wished much to secure good specimens. It was necessary, however, under existing circumstances, to content myself with a couple of samples of each species, and these, too, hastily gathered and put up dripping wet, to the very great astonishment of the natives. Proceeding on, I found, in more open situations, a pretty little iridaceous plant (154), perhaps Libertia micrantha, A. Cunn., (or a new species) growing most profusely, reminding me in the distance of the “daisied meads” of my father-land. Ascending yet higher in pelting rain, I discovered a handsome species of Viola (160), bearing a large white blossom with a fragrant smell. I hastily removed this interesting plant from its mossy bed to the bosom of my cloak, now nearly as wet as the bank where the flower originally grew. Along with it was a small Epilobium (161), in leaf only with axillary inflorescence. In this neighbourhood, I obtained specimens of several plants of the Coprosma genus, which appeared new to me (167, 168, l69, 170); all small shrubs, from 3 to 5 feet in height. A small divaricated shrub without fruit, but apparently a Myrsine (179), I also took a memento of. A fine Lycopodium (173) with terminal spikes of fructification growing pendulous on trees attracted my attention; in habit and growth this plant much resembles L. Flagellaria, Hook., of which it may possibly be a variety. A Restiaceous plant (153), a species rather of Luzula, perhaps a variety of No. 264 already noticed, I gathered in this locality. A small tree with black bark, which appeared to me to be a species of Laurus, was also obtained in flower (197). This plant reminded me of a shrub which I discovered at Wairua in the northern parts of the island in 1840; specimens of which (numbered 14) were sent you in 1841; they both evidently belong to the same genus. A very delicate white Lichen (196) which here and there grew on the trees, as well as a fine terrestrial white Moss, (202) without fructification, I next procured. The densely wooded mountains over which we this day passed, were chiefly composed of sandstone which shewed itself in various stages of decomposition in the very many slips in their sides. In descending one of these gorges, I found a Pteris (285), P. montana, n. sp., W.C. a small glaucous, glabrous species, in affinity very near P. Brunoniana, Endl., of which it may possibly prove, on further examination, to be a variety. A smaller variety of Polypodium sylvaticum (No. 55, already noticed), I also obtained in this neighbourhood. After a silent and persevering march of some hours through the very cold rain, for in threading our tortuous way through the endless mazes of pathless forests in such weather as this, we found it impossible to keep ourselves warm, we began to shiver with cold, and determined on halting at the first sheltered spot. By the side of a rivulet at the bottom of a hill, we found a deserted hovel, which, though open on all sides, offered us a better shelter from the pitiless showers than we had expected to meet with in such a place. We repaired our hut with tufts of the different Carices that grew hard by, and pitched my tent; then throwing off our dripping garments and kindling a fire, we endeavoured to make ourselves as comfortable as possible in our present circumstances. Fortunately we had a few potatoes with us, which, not knowing how long this weather might continue, we divided una voce into three small portions, so as to afford us two meals for the morrow. The rain continuing to descend in torrents, swelled our little brook to a large stream, causing me to fear that the narrow level spot on its banks, on which we were now encamped, would soon be overflowed. 
Dec. 31st. – Daybreak this morning found us much the same as daylight last evening left us, – with water on every side. The past night was one not likely to be soon forgotten. The heavy rain and rattling hail which unceasingly poured down, – the vivid lightenings and hollow-sounding thunder reverberating awfully in never-ending echoes among the hills, – the angry winds which furiously rushed in fitful roaring blasts through the ancient forests, rocking, and cracking, and lashing the monarchs of centuries as so many saplings of a year, stripping their leafy honours, and breaking off their branches, hurled them to the earth, – the hooting of owls, and shrieking of parrots, which flew affrightedly about seeking shelter, – all united to declare, in a voice too plain to be misunderstood, the great commotion. Nature was undergoing; – fit knell for the departing year. The morning was most gloomy; the rain still incessant and our cold, wet, lonely, and all but starving situation, was anything but pleasant; when, as if we wanted somewhat more to taste of the very acme of cheerlessness, our only guide deserted us, returning to Waikare! He had intimated as much last evening, and I had kept a watch over him; he easily, however, found an opportunity of leaving us. My other natives were all from distant parts of the island, and knew no more of these districts than myself. To go back to Waikare, was, from there being no proper path, not a whit easier journey than to go forward to the next village. The weather, however, confined us to our rude shelter, under which I, clad in light summer clothing, shiveringly sat, holding an old umbrella over my head. Towards evening the rain moderated, and I ventured to walk a few yards from the door of my tent. On the banks of the stream I obtained a fine specimen of a small but handsome shrub of the Composita family (148), probably belonging to the genus Haxtonia, or Brachyglottis. Here also I gathered magnificent specimens of my new Viola, which luxuriated on the mossy rocks on the banks of the stream. A Lobelia, too, (260) I also secured growing with the latter, which may prove to be only a variety of L. angulata, possessing, however, larger flowers, and smaller leaves. A Gnaphalium (261), probably identical with 130, already noticed, and an Epilobium (259) came next; and a Pittosporum (134), perhaps P. tenuifolium in fruit. At night, rain still persevering, I called the natives to council, to consider what we had better in our exigency do; so we unanimously agreed, “rain or shine,” to proceed on our journey tomorrow morning, trusting somehow or other to find our way; a determination to which we were compelled through hunger, having consumed our last scanty meal. 
Jan. 1st, 1842. – Early this morning the rain ceased; but as heavy clouds still shrouded the face of heaven, it was just as wet from the dripping trees and rank foliage around us in these deep valleys and dark forests, as if it were still raining. We commenced our wet and cold march sans breakfast with perhaps a more hearty will than if we had fared sumptuously; our route lay by the banks of the river, which we crossed and recrossed repeatedly, making our walk very unpleasant. Here in these deep secluded glens I discovered a new species of Lomaria (246), L. heterophylla, W.C. not of Desvaux, (L. Colensoi, Hook. fil. in Ic. Pl. Tab. DCXXVII, VIII, some of whose immense pinnatifid fronds measured near 3 feet in length. Here also I discovered a large climbing Fern, a peculiar species of Aspidium (287), A. Cunninghamiarum, W.C., differing much from all other species of Aspidium that have come under my notice. This Fern is succulent, coriaceous, and glabrous, and is the largest Fern found climbing trees yet discovered in New Zealand; some of the fronds measured, including stipes, near 3 feet in length. I dedicated this plant in memory of that very zealous botanist, my much lamented friend, the late Allan Cunningham, Esq. In this locality I also found epiphytal on reclining trees, a new species of Hymenophyllum (288), H. villosum, W.C. A beautiful long-fronded and pendulous Moss (174) grew solitarily in the sides of ravines in these damp woods. I could, however, only detect a single specimen bearing capsules; two were on it, one of which, with some barren fronds, I send you. I gathered specimens of other Mosses (182, 183) which appeared to be scarce, and of a very large-leaved Jungermannia (186), and of a small decumbent plant without flower or fruit (180). 
About noon, to our very great surprise, our runaway guide overtook us, bearing a large basket of fine potatoes on his shoulders, for which he had purposely gone back all the way to Waikare, in that heavy rain, in order that we might not suffer from hunger. I could not but applaud the man’s kind consideration, whilst I disapproved of his leaving us in the manner he did, without saying a syllable as to the object of his returning. This, however, is quite in keeping with the national character of the New Zealander. Prompted incessantly by an ever-restless and indomitably independent principle of doing some capricious work of supererogation, their defined duties are left unperformed, they often sadly try to the utmost the patience of those by whom they are employed. In their own language they have a word (pokanoa), which, while it fully conveys the force and meaning of the foregoing remark, is, from the frequency of the occurrence of such behaviour, in daily if not hourly use by every native of New Zealand. Nor is this capricious way of acting confined to those who are still in their novitiate; on the contrary, those who may have been for years in your employ are equally, if not more prone to such conduct. At two P.M., we arrived at Ruatahuna, a small village, surrounded on all sides by dense forests, where we were hospitably received. The natives soon cooked us some potatoes, on which we made a very hearty meal. 
I remained for three days at this village, during which my whole time was fully occupied with the natives. On the morning of the 4th we again recommenced our journey. Our route, at first, lay over very high and steep hills, clothed with forests to their summits; which having attained, we descended to a deep valley, where ran a rapid brawling stream, from 2 to 3 feet in depth. By the banks of this river, among gigantic ferns and underwood, decaying logs and fallen trees, we travelled on, every now and then crossing the stream, which we certainly did this day more than fifty times. This was by no means pleasant, but there was no alternative. I observed in one place where we crossed the river, a small plant, under water, growing thickly in its gravelly bed, where the stream was deep and rapid; I got up a quantity, but could not detect either inflorescence or fruit; from habit and general appearance I believed it to be a species of Epilobium; but unfortunately I subsequently lost the specimens thus procured. On the banks of this river, I first obtained a fine arborescent Dicksonia (289), D. fibrosa, n. sp., W.C. This fern, in its native forests, attains a height of 18 feet. Its large and spreading living fronds measure from 6 to 9 feet in length; these, however, are generally few in number and deciduous. In affinity, it is near D. squarrosa, Sw., from which species, however, it may readily be distinguished, even at a distance, by its very bulky caudex, composed of thick layers of fibres, resembling, at first sight, the fibrous interior of the husk of the cocoa-nut. Some trees I noticed possessing a trunk from 14 to 16 inches in diameter. The natives separate this fibrous epidermis into thick slices, which they use for many purposes in the construction of their houses and stores, being easier cut by them, with their scanty means, than wood. A piece as large as a small plank may readily be obtained. They find it, also, to be much more effectual than timber, in excluding rats and mice, as these animals cannot gnaw through this dry and fibrous substance with the facility which they can through wood. In this locality I also found a species of Myrtus, (194), a small tree, which I believe to be identical with one discovered on the banks of the River Wairua in 1841, and numbered 23 in the case of specimens sent you in that year, bearing orange-coloured and edible berries. It also seems to be a closely allied species to No. 115, already noticed. This graceful shrub, or small tree, grows to the height of 10 or 12 feet. About four P.M., we emerged from the dense woods to a large plain, covered with Pteris esculenta, the first plain of fern we had seen for several days. Passing over this plain, I obtained from a boggy watercourse, a small plant, with white flowers (189), a species of Marchantia (198), a Hydrocotyle (199), and a species of Hypericum (200). The latter appeared to me to be very distinct from H. pusillum, D. C., in being a much larger plant, of erect growth, with oblong calyces, and oblong-ovate, or obovate, undulated and margined leaves; whereas H. pusillum is described “caule debile prostrato, foliis ovatis obtusis, calyce lanceolata,” &c. We halted this evening at Te Waiiti, a fenced village, situated on the banks of the river at the end of the plain. The next morning we resumed our journey. On ascending the first hill, I found a small plant growing in a rivulet (195), perhaps a variety of 189, already noticed. A little further on splendid specimens of Lomaria linearis grew luxuriantly about the margins of woods near the river. Here, also, were several fine plants of Dicksonia fibrosa, their trunks grotesquely hewn by the natives into all manner of uncommon shapes in cutting away their fibrous epidermis, for the purposes already mentioned. Discovered another Lomaria this morning (290), in ascending the first wooded hill after crossing the river. This species, (L. deltoides, n. sp. W.C.) approaches very closely to L. deflexa (n. sp. No. 268), already noticed; differing, however, in its habit, manner of growth, size, and in being hairy underneath, and ciliated on the margins of its pinna. In a damp forest I obtained fine specimens of my new Davallia (No. 56), already mentioned, some fronds measuring 18 inches in length. I only observed this fern growing in two places in the whole of my journey, and not above half-a-dozen plants in either spot. Ascending the barren and lofty hills before us, I found, near their summits, a species of Composita (185), which I had not previously seen. These hills were formed chiefly of broken pumice and ashes. The sun was intensely hot, and the roads, in several places, worn into deep and hollow gorges, were extremely dry and dusty, our feet, and even our ancles, being often completely buried in the loose and broken pumice through which we had to travel. Gaining the summit of the highest hill, the view was most extensive and striking. Immediately beneath, meandered the Wirinaki, a bold brawling river, flowing quickly over its stony bed, and possessing water sufficient to float a moderate sized boat; beyond, rose barren hills of all possible irregular shapes and heights; further still, an extensive plain extended E. and W. as far as the eye could reach; next, a chain of lofty, table-topped hills bounded the range of vision; whilst, here and there, far away in the extreme distance, several high and isolated mountains reared their barren heads above the horizon. On the left appeared Tauwaura, a high mountain in the Taupo district; Paeroa and Kaingaroa, near Rotorua, presented themselves in front; whilst, to the extreme right, Putauaki, the high mountain, near Wakatane, on the east coast, upreared its two-peaked summit to the clouds. Here, notwithstanding the pleasurable height to which my imagination had been raised, whilst engaged in contemplating the magnificence and extent of the prospect before me, it soon sank below its ordinary level, on finding that not a human being dwelt in all that immense tract of country on which my eager gaze then rested! The grass grew, the flowers blossomed, and the river rolled, but not for man – solitude all! Even the little birds, few though they were in number, seemed to think with me, for they flew from spray to spray, around and about my path, with their melancholy “twit, twit,” as if wishing to have all they could of the company of a passer-by. Their actions were quite in unison with my feelings, and I could but exclaim, “Oh! Solitude, where are thy charms?” etc. 
Descending the banks of the river Wirinaki, I was rewarded with the discovery of a few new plants: among them a linear-leaved Coprosma (178), a procumbent and straggling shrub, in habit and general appearance much like C. acerosa, doubtless identical with that species; two species of Epilobium, one a very beautiful species (188), which I believe to be the same as one the leaves of which 1 had previously noticed in the valley of Waiapu, (vide sp. No. 10, &c.), the other with densely linear and serrated leaves (187); different kinds of Gramineæ (184, 190, 201, this last a variety, perhaps, of number 53); a small shrubby Dracophyllum (192) and a Carmichælia (193). Possibly this Carmichælia may prove identical with that (No. 7β.) observed without flowers or fruit in Waiapu valley. Crossing the water I obtained a very pretty little Polygonum (148), some plants of which were so small as not to exceed an inch in height, although bearing both flower and fruit. Proceeding over the long plain I had seen from the hill-tops, and which was exceedingly barren, I got specimens of some small Restiaceous? plants (181, 191), which, with Leucopogon Fraseri and the small Polygonum already noticed, comprized the vegetation of this very desolate place. Night was fast closing around us, and we quickened our pace, although excessively tired, in hopes of finding a few sticks wherewith to kindle a fire, for none at present appeared within the range of our eye-sight. After some time we met with some small dry scrub (Leptospermum scoparium) on the bank of the river, where we bivouacked for the night. At a very early hour the next morning we recommenced our journey. Crossing the rapid river, Rangitaiki, at the end of the plain, (which at the fording-place we found to be breast-deep, and which we were obliged to cross in an oblique direction, that we might not be swept down by its strong current), we travelled over a country more sterile, if possible, than that of yesterday. An interminable succession of dry and barren hills of lava, pumice, ashes, and other volcanic matter, where the stunted vegetation was all but quite burnt up with the long drought, afforded a very scanty gleaning to the Botanist. I was rewarded, however, with a few new plants in this day’s toilsome march. A fine species of erect Cardamine (138) was found at Mangamako, a little wood through which we passed; a very graceful Dracophyllum (145), a small shrub, from two to four feet in height, grew sparingly here in the little dells between the hills; and in the same locality I obtained a small species of Gnaphalium (137α, &c.), which appeared to differ from any yet noticed. Here also I procured specimens of two curious little plants of Compositæ (140, 141) which sprung up in dense patches on the dry and broken pumice. Towards evening, we arrived in the neighbourhood of the Rotorua Lakes. When traversing a deep bog, I discovered a very peculiar little leafless monopetalous- flowered plant, growing in the mud (143). On nearing Rangiwakaaitu, the first and southernmost lake, I was much gratified with the very lovely appearance of a truly beautiful species of Leptospermum (144), a small tree from 15 to 25 feet in height, which flourished here, growing in clumps and rows as if artificially planted. These trees were literally laden with a profusion of beautiful blossom; and, from there being no under wood about them, not so much as a tuft of grass, they looked the more charming and conspicuous. Another circumstance struck me as singular: no small or young trees of the species could be met with; all were old trees of many years’ growth. I say old, because the Leptospermum is a slow growing plant. Beneath them I saw a curious woolly moss (139,) which, though sought for assiduously, I could not detect bearing any fructification. 
We had intended to make Tarawera (the second lake where some natives resided) our halting-place for this night; but, although we had nothing to eat, we were so excessively tired as to bring up on the white-gravelled shores of the placid Rangiwakaaitu. I offered my natives the choice of staying supperless where we were, or proceeding to Tarawera distant about three miles, and there getting food; fatigue, however, overcame hunger and they chose the latter. The whole face of the country in the neighbourhood of the lake was overspread with massy blocks of lava, scattered in every direction, many of which were vitrified on the surface. The ground rose gently from the lake, which appeared to occupy a deep hollow, and I could but venture to suppose that this might perhaps have been the crater of that volcano, which, in some bygone age, inundated the adjacent country with showers of pumice and ashes. 
Jan. 7th. – Early this morning we arose, feverish, stiff, and sore, from our gravelly couch to recommence our march. We soon came within sight of the place where the hot springs were situated, from which the steam and sulphureous vapours continually ascended in dense white clouds. The air this morning was cool and bracing. After travelling about an hour and a half we arrived most ravenously hungry at Tarawera lake. Here, at a little village on its banks, we procured some potatoes, on which we breakfasted with a hearty zest. At this place were several small hot springs, which flowed out of the earth near the edge of the lake; the water of some being hotter than the hand could bear. Just within the lake the water was warm, a little further on it was luke warm, and, further still, cold; so that these natives have baths of every requisite degree of heat always ready without any trouble whatever. The water of the lake I suppose to be specifically heavier than the sulphuretted hot waters which flowed into it; as, whenever the natives of the village wished to drink, I observed them to go into the lake and dashing the uppermost water aside with their feet quickly take up some from beneath; which, they said, was good and cold. The natives of the village informed me that at a spring on a hill at a little distance, the water was quite hot enough for the purpose of cooking, for which they often used it. Sulphur, too, abounded there, and was frequently “thrown up” out of the earth, from a place whence steam and smoke ever ascended. My curiosity being excited, while breakfast was getting ready, I set off with a native of the village as a guide to the boiling spring; but after gaining one hill and not perceiving any sign of the same, and being almost exhausted from want of food, hunger overcame curiosity and I returned to the village. I have several times been surprised at the great carelessness which I have exhibited towards rare natural productions, when either over-fatigued or ravenously hungry; at such times botanical, geological and other specimens, which I had eagerly and with much pleasure collected and carefully carried for many a weary mile, have become quite a burden, and have been sometimes one by one abandoned; to be, however, invariably regretted afterwards. Breakfast ended, we, accompanied by the chief of the village, paddled to near the opposite extremity of the lake. This sheet of water is about three and a half miles in length, and from one to two miles in breadth; surrounded on all sides by barren hills and very deep. Landing and walking about two furlongs, we came to Kareka, another little lake much smaller than the preceding. Here we were obliged to wait some time before we could get a canoe, which being obtained, we paddled about a mile to the opposite end, landed and continued our journey. Gaining the top of a high hill we had a fine prospect of the principal lake of Rotorua: a noble sheet of water about six miles in diameter with a very picturesque island nearly in the midst. An easy journey of a few miles from this place brought us to Te Ngae, the mission station on the east side of the lake, where the hospitable reception I received from Mr. and Mrs. Chapman, quickly made me forget all hardships. I gained not a single botanical specimen of anything new this day. 
At Te Ngae I remained a few days, during which time I visited Ohinemutu, a large and fenced town on the bank of the lake, celebrated for its boiling springs. The largest spring at this place was boiling most furiously, throwing out many gallons of water a minute, which rolled away steaming and smoking into the lake, a second Phlegethon! In the smaller springs, of which there were several, the natives cook their food, merely tying it up in a rude basket, of the leaves of Phormium tenax, woven together, and placing it in the boiling water, where it is soon dressed. For this purpose, and for that of bathing, they have made a number of holes through the crust or scoriæ, on which this village is principally built; so that it may truly be said, that this people dwell in houses erected over subterranean fires. The sulphureous stench which abounded here was almost insupportable. The blade of a knife, immersed for a short period in some of these waters, soon becomes, as it were, superficially bronzed. Accidents not unfrequently happen to children, and to dogs and pigs brought from a distance. The quadrupeds, however, of the place appear instinctively to be well aware of the heat of these streams, and shun them accordingly. The natives who live in this neighbourhood are, when travelling, easily recognized as belonging to this district, in consequence of their front teeth decaying at an early age, contrary to those of other New Zealanders: this is supposed to be caused by the sulphur with which these springs are impregnated, being deposited on the surface of their food in cooking, which consisting chiefly of roots, is mostly bitten into morsels with their front teeth. Here, on the very edge of the large boiling spring, several plants flourished exceedingly, particularly Pteris Brunoniana, Endl. 
I brought away specimens of two plants which grew on the brink of the boiling water, and which seemed new; one, a species of Carex (136), the other, a plant of the order Compositæ (137), probably a Myriogyne, differing however from M. minuta, Less., the leaves of which are much smaller and sessile. I regretted not having a thermometer by which I might ascertain the temperature of the water. Fine specimens of crystallized sulphur abound in this neighbourhood; but from their delicate structure and extreme fragility, it is rather a difficult matter to convey them to any distance so as to preserve their beauty. The barren hills in the neighbourhood produced an elegant Lycopodium (215), which I suppose to be an entirely new species; and the same locality, afforded a new species of Gaultheria (216), a branching shrub, 4-7 feet in height. Near the station I observed a large Ranunculus (218) growing in low places in the vicinity of the lake; and in the thickets, close by, a species of Rubus in fruit (219), a shrubby plant, climbing over the bushes and young trees near it. Some natives informing me of a new and peculiar tree, which grew on Mokoia, the island in the middle of the lake, I crossed to it, and sought for the same, but found nothing new. From subsequent information, I was led to conclude that the tree of which I had been in quest was no other than the Vitex littoralis of A. Cunn.; one individual of which, according to the natives grew on the island, but not another in the whole district. I observed the natives continually masticating a kind of resinous gum, which was insoluble in water, and did not decrease through the process of repeated chewing; this, they informed me, they procured from the Pukapuka (Brachyglottis repanda, A.C.), assuring me that the swallowing of the substance would cause death. They pointed out the shrub, which, although slightly differing in general appearance, bore a strong resemblance to Cunningham’s plant; yet as it was neither in flower nor fruit, I did not collect any specimens. It may, however, prove new. Mr. Chapman has kindly promised to procure me some of the resinous matter, and specimens of the shrub when the season comes. Through the kindness of the same gentleman I obtained, from a spring in the neighbourhood, several specimens of siliceous matter, deposited by the waters of the springs on twigs, leaves, &c. lying in it, some of which I inclose in the case now sent. The lake contains an abundance of small cray-fish, which are very good eating. Here are also two small kinds of fish, called by the natives Kokopu and Inanga, and a black bivalve a species of Unio; the whole of which are common in most of the fresh-water streams in New Zealand. 
Jan. 13th. – Early this morning I left Te Ngae. Crossing the lake to the N.W. extremity, I landed, and once more recommenced my journey. We soon entered the dense forest, through which the road to Tauranga lies, and in which we travelled until sunset. Here, in a low, wet, and shaded spot, I noticed another new and peculiar species of Lomaria (291, L. niffra, n. sp. W.C.) From the stony banks of Mangarewa, a small river running in a deep ravine, I procured specimens of a small Cyperaceous plant (221), which appeared to me to be new. In this locality, too, I discovered an elegant Lindsæa (292, L. viridis, n. sp. W.C.) and another fern, which has puzzled me exceedingly, but which may possibly be, after all, but a variety of Aspidium hispidulum, Swartz. I send you, however, a specimen (293) for minute examination. In travelling this day, I carelessly plucked a fern, which grew pendulous from a tree by the path-side, believing it to be Asplenium falcatum, Forst.; happening, however, to preserve the fragment, I have since examined it, and consider it a very distinct species; I have named it A. Forsterianum, in honour of that celebrated Botanist, whose name should ever be held in remembrance by all persons botanizing in the forests of New Zealand: a portion of my only specimen I send you (294). I also obtained in this forest some fine specimens of a Tmesipteris (296), which, if not possessing distinctness sufficient to constitute a new species, differs much from my specimens of T. Forsteri, Endl. in size and general appearance. 
Whilst my natives were pitching my tent, I obtained a few specimens of Jungermannia (220, 223, 225, 226) and a Moss (222), with, apparently, a peculiar yellow lichen parasitical upon it. I hope that some, at least, of these may prove to be new. As the shades of night closed about us in the deep recesses of the forest, we were visited with numbers of green coleopterous insects which my natives caught, roasted, and ate. During the night the mosquitoes so sadly annoyed us as to keep us from sleeping. At an early hour the next morning we arose and resumed our march, continuing our course, as yesterday, in the forest. I gathered a fine Moss (227), a species of Polytrichum; and an Urtica with lanceolate leaves (224), which appears to be undescribed. Emerging from the wood, I discovered a fine Gaultheria (217), perhaps the same as the one from Rotorua, (216), already mentioned. From the summit of the hills where this long forest terminates, a fine and extensive prospect of Tauranga harbour, distant about fifteen miles, presents itself to the view. The road from this place to the sea-side lies through fern land, and is chiefly a descent the whole way. We arrived at the mission station about six P.M., without observing any thing worth noticing on the road thither. 
At Tauranga I remained a few days; and on the 19th, once more resumed my peregrinations. Crossing the inner harbour which is wide and very shallow, we landed at the N.W. extremity of the bay where the road to the interior commences. Our route this day, after landing, being principally by the sea-side, afforded nothing new, save a species of Anthoceros (231), which grew in wet places on the pipe-clay cliffs. We bivouacked for the night by the side of a small stream where we were incessantly tormented with mosquitoes; and to add to our misery, my guides returned sans cérémonie, leaving my baggage in the desolate wild; through which conduct we were obliged to remain supperless, not having had any food since our early breakfast. The next morning, after some delay from our want of guides, who were eventually obtained from a party of natives in the neighbourhood, we again proceeded, and entering a dense forest, travelled on for several hours, emerging at length on the top of Te Wairere, a very high hill, from the summit of which the view of the surrounding country is most extensive. Tongariro, a very high and still active volcano in the Taupo district, my guide assured me may be seen in clear weather from this place. Beneath us, in the extensive plain, the river Waiho, hence navigable for canoes, meandered, mingling its waters with those of the ocean at Puriri on the Thames. In the forest I obtained a few small Cryptogamic specimens (210, 211, 212, 213, 214), but no other plants attracted my notice as being either new or rare. Descending Te Wairere we halted at a brawling stream at its base to roast a few potatoes. Here, on the brink of the stream, I discovered a small tree of a genus unknown to me, (unless it may prove to belong to Trophis). I only observed one plant, which was about fifteen feet high, with smooth cinereous bark, solitary crimson fruit, and branches not spreading (228). On cutting its bark a profusion of thick viscid milky juice flowed out. A fine Pimelia (233) was growing plentifully here, which may prove to be identical with No. 24. A small Jungermannia (230) and a species of moss (232), were found by the side of the stream, the waters of which afforded a species of Alga (229). Leaving this place we crossed the river Waiho, which at the ford was nearly breast-high, and proceeded on, over the plain and through the extensive swamps, towards Matamata, a large native village, which place we reached late at night. In crossing the marshes I only noticed a Coprosma as being new, and of which I brought away specimens (207). 
21st. – Early this morning I left Matamata, travelling in a S.E. direction towards Maungatautari, an elevated district situated nearly midway between the east and west coasts. In crossing a small river I discovered a peculiar Carex-like procumbent plant (206) growing in its bed, completely under water. As it was now the driest season of the year, and as the water of the stream was nearly 2 feet deep, this plant must necessarily be always immersed. A graceful-leaved Hydrocotyle (209) I also procured specimens of. After walking about eight miles over level and barren ground, we entered a romantic valley called by the natives Hinuera. This valley has on either side high and perpendicular volcanic rocks, composed of a conglomerate of pumice, scoriæ, obsidian, &c. On the south side of the valley this rocky rampart ran continuously for nearly two miles, while on the north side the hills bore on their table-tops groves and clumps of graceful pines, which contributed not a little to the beauty of the landscape. Halted at 2 P.M., to dine under a large and projecting crag, which, jutting out from the rocks on the north side of the valley, overhung our path. Here, beneath this rock, I discovered an elegant Asplenium (295, A. Hookerianum, n. sp., W.C.), a species approaching very near in habit and affinity to A. Colensoi. I did myself the honour and pleasure of naming this graceful Fern in compliment to my much respected and talented friend J. D. Hooker, Esq., M. D., who, in the capacity of Naturalist, visited these islands in H.M.S. “Erebus,” (one of the Antarctic Discovery Ships) in the winter of 1841. In a thicket in this neighbourhood through which we passed, I detected a graceful shrub of very slender habit (234) with peculiar hairy (strigoso-hispid) bark. This plant has only a few divaricated branches, and attains to the height of 6-9 feet. Proceeding hence we suddenly came upon a most remarkable subsidence of the earth in the midst of a large plain. After descending through a rapidly inclining and narrow defile having sandy slopes on either side (on which in dense patches grew that little plant I had found in low sandy places in Waiapu valley on the east coast, No. 29), I reached a level also of sand, and destitute of the least blade of vegetation; thence I descended an almost perpendicular descent knee-deep in sand to another level, where a subject for contemplation and astonishment presented itself. On all sides rose perpendicular and sandy cliffs, varying in height from 150 to 200 feet, for the most part white and sterile and composed of loose volcanic sand and pebbles to their very bases. At the bottom of this immense ravine a gentle stream wound its silent way, whilst a little further whole trees dead and charred (from whose sides the loose sand, &c., had been removed by the action of the winds and rains) stood erect, in the spots where many years ago they once grew at a depth from 1 to 200 feet below the present level of the soil!! I greatly regretted my being so much pressed for time in passing this place (called by the natives Piarere), but the Sabbath drew nigh, we had no provision, with several miles yet to go ere we should reach a village, and the loose sand through which we were now toiling we often sunk in up to our knees. Quitting this hollow, and ascending its S.W. side, I was again agreeably surprised and pleased in seeing the noble River Waikato, with its blue waters (here wide, and swift, and deep), rolling majestically along. This is the largest fresh-water stream I have yet seen in New Zealand. This river the natives navigate in their canoes from above this place to where it disembogues into the south ocean on the west coast, a distance of upwards of two hundred miles. In consequence of there not being any food here, we had to travel nearly five miles in an almost southerly direction by the bank of the river, ere we could cross it. There, however, we found a rude bridge thrown across at a place where the river is very narrow, being confined within a sandstone channel through which it rushes with fearful velocity, eddying, and foaming, and carrying everything before it. The sandstone rocks on either side, through the softness of the stone, and the continual working of the waters, were fretted into a thousand fantastic shapes. 
Leaving the river, and ascending the western banks, we proceeded in a westerly direction for upwards of six miles, arriving at sunset, unwell, in pain, and much fatigued, at Wareturere, a small village in the Maungatautari district, where we were hospitably received by the natives. The sun, throughout this day, was intensely hot, and most of the country over which we passed quite free from wood, and very dry and dusty. Gained little indeed, in botany this day. 
24th. – Early this morning, I resumed my journey. The fervent sun, unobscured with clouds, told of another melting day; and the high fern-brakes through which we had to force our way, abounded with their dreaded subtle yellow dust. 
“In vain the sight, dejected, to the ground
 Stoops for relief; thence hot-ascending steams, 
And keen reflection, pain.” 
                           “Distressful Nature pants, 
The very streams look languid from afar, 
Or, through the unsheltered glade, impatient seem 
To hurl into the covert of the grove.” 

Cheering my native companions in travel, we struggled on together up the steep hills. Reaching the summit of the wooded mountainous range, we descended over fern-land into extensive swampy plains. I observed that pest to agriculture, the large-leaved Rumex, very plentiful here. The natives say that the Ngapuhi tribes (who live in the north parts of the island, and with whom they were formerly at continual enmity), introduced it in order to spoil their lands. I doubt, however, the cause assigned for its introduction here in the very centre of the island, but not the fact. At Poverty Bay and parts adjacent, the natives assert that the seed of this plant was originally sold them by whites for tobacco seed! It is now to be met with in several districts, in common with many other noxious European weeds. I have often noticed in travelling, certain spots abounding with the rankest vegetation, but without a single indigenous plant. The new comers appear to vegetate so fast as quite to exterminate and supersede the original possessors of the soil. In crossing a very deep and boggy place in the swamp, this morning, I again met with that peculiar and pretty little leafless plant already noticed, No. 143, in perfection. I found it, however, not a very easy matter to procure specimens, as it grew only on the deep black mud of the bog; fortunately, I succeeded in gathering some (208), without getting very deep into the mud. Here, in the midst of the swamp, a beautiful bird, apparently of the crane kind, rose gracefully from among the reeds, and flew slowly around us; its under plumage was of a light yellow or ochre colour, with dark brown upper feathers. None of my natives knew the bird, declaring they had never seen such an one before. Leaving the swamp and entering on the plain beyond it, I discovered a new and elegant plant of the Orchideæ family and genus Microtis, possessing a beautiful carmine-coloured perianth, with pubescent scape and spike (203). It was, however, very scarce, and only grew in one low spot by the path-side. Most of the plants had flowered; but I was fortunate enough to procure two specimens that were still in blossom. I also met with a little Restiaceous? flexuose and procumbent plant (204), which grew in patches plentifully in this locality. A beautiful Moss, too, I discovered here (235), and noticed that pretty little Lobelia, already mentioned under No. 58, growing hereabouts in great profusion. Towards evening, in crossing a deep and watery swamp, I gathered specimens of a Coprosma (205), which may prove a new species; it was a small tree, 6 to 8 feet in height. At sunset, we reached the Mission Station at Otawao where Mr. Morgan resides. This place being almost in the midst of an extensive plain affords little entertainment to the botanist. 
26th. – Again recommenced our journey towards the western coast. I did not gather a single plant during the whole of this day’s march, although we travelled over many a weary mile of desolate wilderness, until some time after sunset. At one part of our route this morning, the scenery was of the most enchanting description; groves and clumps of that elegant Pine, Dacrydium excelsum, were intersected with small placid lakes, and level plains, free from underwood, the whole appearing as a work of art. Late at night we threw ourselves down to rest among the fern in a small and miserable village near the banks of the river Waipa. Rest, however, was out of the question, for our old implacable winged tormentors, the mosquitoes, were innumerable. The next morning before sunrise hungry, weary and sleepy, we willingly started from this wretched place, where our night, instead of being one of rest, had literally been one of continual torment. 
Passing a deep and muddy water-course, I obtained specimens of a large-leaved Myriophyllum (238), which may probably prove to be a new species. The banks on either side of the water in which it grew being of deep mud made it difficult to procure good specimens. A half-an-hour’s march brought us to a village on the immediate banks of the Waipa river. Here we obtained a canoe and got some food, which having quickly despatched, we proceeded down the river in our bark. This river has a very tortuous course, winding continually to all points of the compass. Its width is pretty uniform, generally being from 70 to 100 feet, with a slow current. It is navigable hence for large boats, and the sides are, in many places, densely clothed with trees to the water’s edge; among which Dacrydium excelsum shows itself conspicuous. In its banks which are mostly composed of alluvial earth, and which in some places are 14-20 feet in height, pipe-clay and volcanic sand sometimes present themselves to the view. At four P.M. we reached Ngaruawahie, the spot where the junction of this river with the Waikato is effected. As before the Waikato came rolling impetuously on, carrying its waters quite across the placid Waipa to the opposite bank. From this place the two rivers bear the name of Waikato to the sea, and justly so too, as the waters of the Waipa are completely lost in those of the deep and rapid Waikato. A little below Ngaruawahie we met a native in a canoe with a live and elegant specimen of the genus Fulica. I hailed the man, and purchased the bird, which he had recently snared for a little tobacco. It was a most graceful creature: and as far as I am aware, an entirely new and undescribed species. Its general colour was dark, almost black; head grey, and without a frontal shield; fore-neck and breast, ferruginous-red; wings barred with white; bill sharp; feet and legs glossy olive; toes beautifully and largely festooned at the edges; the eyes light-coloured and very animated. The bird was very fierce, and never ceased attempting to bite at every thing within its reach. I kept it until we landed, intending to preserve it; but it was late, and I had neither material at hand nor time to spare, and the animal too, looked so very lovely, that I could not make up my mind to put it to death, so I let it go: it swam, and dived, and disappeared. From its not possessing a frontal shield on the forehead (which is one of the principal generic marks of the Linnæan genus Fulica), it may possibly be hereafter considered as the type of a new genus serving to connect the genera Fulica and Rallus. Not a doubt, however, in my opinion can exist, as to its being naturally allied in habit and affinity to the former; I have therefore named it Fulica Novæ Zelandiæ, In size, it was somewhat less than our European species, F. atra. I gained not any botanical specimens this day, save the Myriophyllum already mentioned, although I had every reason to believe that many new and interesting plants would doubtless be found in the dense and ever-humid forests on the immediate banks of this noble river. Time, however, would not permit my delaying for that purpose. 
27th. – This morning, at an early hour, I recommenced my voyage down the Waikato. I found the river to widen considerably, being in some places from three hundred to five hundred yards in width, but very shallow. Its course, here, was not so sinuous and much more northerly than those portions we passed over yesterday. The land is low on either side, and, as I proceeded, several small and flat islands divided the river into channels. After paddling about twenty miles we beached our canoe on a small island, in order to breakfast. The river here is very shoal with a sandy bottom, which, together with the subsoil of the island on which we landed is of volcanic origin consisting of broken lava and pumice. I found nothing new among the vegetation of the islet. Near this place, the natives informed me, and at a short distance from the right bank of the river, is a large lake, in which are quantities of Kanae, (Mugil –) and Patiki, (Pleuronectes –) neither of which fish is found in the Waikato. The lake is named Waikare and runs into the Waikato a little lower down. As we proceeded, the banks of the river became more and more lovely being, in many places, clothed with the richest profusion of vegetation to the water’s edge. Among the trees the Kahikatea (Dacrydium excelsum) was ever predominant. We noticed a Kauri (Dammara australis) to-day for the first time since we left the Bay of Islands; at seeing which my natives, whom I had brought with me from the East Coast, (and who had never seen one of these pines before it not being found in those parts), were much gratified. Towards evening we passed several islets in the river, some of which were high and beautifully wooded, and noticed Dacrydium excelsum growing very close together in the forests. Gathered, overhanging the banks of the river, a specimen of Parsonsia with axillary inflorescence (239), which may, how ever prove but a variety of P. heterophylla, as that plant continually varies in appearance, hardly two specimens being alike. I also obtained a specimen of a small weak plant with opposite obovate and sub-spathulate leaves (240) from inundated places near the river, which was new to me; I could not, however, detect it anywhere in flower. Two specimens of Epilobium, (241, 244) one (244) a very fine plant; a Myriophyllum (245) and a linear-leaved floating plant [Potamogeton?] (247) which grew in the water, I also procured in this locality. Brought up, for the night, on a little open flat on the left bank of the river. The mosquitoes, as might have been expected, were in interminable clouds and most annoying. Large quantities of an elegant species of Cyperus, (C. fulvus? R. Br.) grew here on either shore. 
28. – Early this morning we resumed our course down the river which here begins to be under the influence of the tides. The morning was squally and lowering, with every indication of a gale at hand. As we neared the sea-coast the river became very wide, being from two to three miles across, and containing several flat islands. The water here is shallow. At noon we had a prospect of the outer range of hills on the West Coast; and a more dreary and sterile one cannot easily be imagined; high and broken ferruginous-coloured sandhills destitute of the least vestige of vegetation. The wind setting in from the sea against the ebbing tide caused the water to become very rough, calling forth our united energies to keep our frail bark from swamping. At two P.M. we landed in safety at Maraetei, a station belonging to the Church Mission where the Rev. R. Maunsell resides, whose kind and hospitable reception quickly made us forget the little danger we had so very lately been in. Maraetei is on the immediate south bank of Waikato river, and only about a mile distant from the heads. The land on the southern side is very high and precipitous; while on the northern it is lower, and for three or four miles the very perfection of barrenness. Mr. M., who has been several times up and down the river, supposes the distance which we came by water to be from 130 to 150 miles; being very nearly what I had calculated it. The river decreases rapidly in width as you approach its mouth, which is exceedingly narrow, with a bar across it, on which is two fathom of water. Here, the breakers burst continually; one or two small vessels have, however, entered. 
Feb. 1st – At six A.M. we left Maraetei; crossing the river in a canoe to the northern bank, and proceeded over the sand hills on our journey towards Manukau. We soon descended to the outer coast, over the interminable sandy beach of which we travelled until an hour after sunset; when greatly fatigued we halted for the night on the sands, about three miles within the Southern head of Manukau Bay. The land to our right this day was high and much broken, composed of sand and sandstone, and covered with verdure. The continual falling, however, of the sand, &c. of which these hills are composed, will, in process of time, cause them entirely to disappear. I noticed some plants, evidently species of Edwardsia, the habit and foliage of which differed from the one I have hitherto seen. I took specimens (243), and regretted there not being either flower or fruit. A little Limosella? (242) also grew here in the sand. On the face of a damp cliff, near a small water-course which trickled down the rocks, I discovered a peculiar succulent plant bearing a raceme of obovate red drupæ (246). These, with a moss (237), from the wet rocks in this locality, comprised the whole of my collection during this day’s journey. 
The next morning we continued our course by the sinuous shores of Manukau Bay. We soon reached a native village, where, gaining a supply of potatoes, &c., we recruited our strength, and, engaging a canoe, paddled to the upper extremity of the harbour, landing at Otahuhu, the isthmus connecting the northern and southern parts of the Northern Island of New Zealand. This isthmus is very narrow, only about three-quarters of a mile across, and an almost level piece of ground. There are not any forests in this locality, scarcely even a single tree; the eye wanders over a succession of low volcanic hills, bearing nothing but the monotonous brown Fern (Pteris esculenta), with here and there a shrub of Coriaria sarmentosa rising a few feet above the common denizen of the soil by which it is everywhere surrounded. This neighbourhood was once densely inhabited; but the frequent and sanguinary wars of the ferocious tribes of this benighted land, have all but entirely depopulated these fertile districts. 
Having concluded to return overland to the Bay of Islands, we procured a supply of rice – the only portable article of food obtainable in these parts – for we were now about entering on an uninhabited route, and that too without a guide. 
Early in the morning of the 4th, we left Otahuhu in a small canoe which we had borrowed, and paddling down the Bay about four miles, landed on the northern side of the harbour, and continued our course by the muddy winding shores of Te Wau, a little cove, where the path leading to Kaipara commenced. Here, while my natives were engaged in cooking our breakfast, I discovered a shrub of a genus altogether unknown to me. It bears an oblong succulent bacca, containing several large, angular, and irregularly shaped seeds (248); the mode of growth is diffuse and slender, with but few branches, and its height is from 5 to 9 feet. In habit alone it approaches some species of the Coprosma genus. There were several of these shrubs here, on the immediate banks of a little rivulet which ran through this dell; I did not, however, observe them in any other locality. Continuing our journey, I found, in ascending the first clayey hill from the sea-side, a handsome shrubby Dracophyllum (249), which, from its not being noticed by Cunningham in his “Precursor” I suppose to be a new species. This shrub is from 2 to 5 feet in height, somewhat rigid in its growth, and branched at bottom. It will, with the other new species already mentioned, No. 145, naturally fall between D. latifolium, . Banks, and D. Urvilleanum, Rich., and thus connect the whole of the already known New Zealand species. We travelled on, over open and barren heaths, in a northerly direction, till sunset, but saw nothing new in these dreary and sterile wilds, save the Dracophyllum already noticed. Bivouacked for the night in a little dell, nestling among the close growing Leptospermum: not a stick being anywhere within ken large enough to serve as a tent-pole. Next morning we recommenced our journey in rain, the country for several miles being much the same as that of yesterday. About noon we passed some forests of Dammara, which were burning fiercely; some person or persons who had lately gone that way having set fire to the brushwood, which soon caught the forests. This is a very common occurrence in New Zealand, and often thoughtlessly done by the natives on purpose to cause a blaze, by which means many a noble forest of Pines has been entirely consumed. A species of Metrosideros was growing in these woods, a small tree about 15 feet in height, of which I took specimens (250). A fragment of a woolly-looking Jungermannia (251), a Polygonum (253), and a Pimelea (254) were also procured in this locality. All these, perhaps, have been already noticed. 
On arriving at Kaipara, we found we had no means of crossing the harbour, a sheet of water which, from where we now were, at the extreme southern inlet of the harbour, to the nearest landing place on the northern shore, was more than sixty miles across. Our situation at this place was rather unpleasant, no natives being near. Rather, however, than retrace our weary steps to Otahuhu, we agreed to wait a day or two, in hopes of a canoe arriving at the landing-place. Here then we remained until the night of Tuesday the 8th, making fires on the brow of the hill, in order, if possible, to attract the attention of the inhabitants residing on the opposite shores of the water before us. No one, however, came; and on Tuesday, reconnoitring with my glass, I saw the roof of a hut about four miles distant, which, from its construction, I knew to belong to a white. Thither, without delay, I despatched two of my natives, who, to their credit be it said, willingly went, although they had to force a passage through mud and underwood the whole distance. At night they returned, with two whites, in an old, patched-up, and leaky boat, in which we gladly left this wretched place, where the mosquitoes were more numerous and intolerably annoying than I had ever before found them. So thick and tormenting were these insects at night, that I was obliged to leave my tent, and move about in my cloak from place to place, as they successively found me out. We had, in hopes of avoiding them, pitched our tent on the top of the hill, more than a mile from the water below, but without the least change for the better. 
On the morning of the 12th, after encountering no little hardship and danger, we landed near the upper end of Otamatea inlet, on the north-east side of Kaipara. Here the boat left us, and we soon found that our situation was ten times worse than before; for there was no path, nor the slightest indication of the treading of a human foot in these solitary and pathless deserts. Return we could not, for our boat was gone; stand still we dared not, as our small supply of food was fast diminishing; proceed we hardly cared to think of, not knowing whither our tortuous course would end, in a country like this, where we now, for the first time, were hemmed in among tangled brakes and primaeval forests, bounded by a distant horizon of high and broken hills. In this exigency I determined on proceeding by compass in as straight a line as possible to the eastern coast; for although I had not a map with me, I was well aware that the Island was narrow in these parts. Words however fail to describe what we had to undergo in forcing our way through the horrid interwoven mass of shrubs, creepers, and fern, and prostrate trees, and swamps, and mud. Suffice to say, that by dint of extreme exertion I providentially gained the sand-hills at Mangaẁai, on the east coast, by ten A.M., on Monday the 14th. Descending the hilly range on the sea-coast, I found there was an extensive inlet to cross, which, as the tide was flowing fast, I lost no time in fording; so plunging in, I waded to the opposite shore, the water being breast-high. I supposed my natives to be following pretty closely after me; and feeling quite an appetite for my breakfast, having walked nearly six hours this morning, I commenced looking narrowly about for fresh water, continuing my journey towards the coast. Here, exhausted though I was, I discovered and secured an hitherto unnoticed species of Leptospermum, a shrub or small tree, growing plentifully on the sand-hills, from 6 to 10 feet in height, bearing a villous capsule (255), apparently near L. attenuatum, Sw. Here, too, a shrub of the Order Compositæ (perhaps identical with Cassinia leptophylla), was seen profusely, of which I brought away a specimen for examination (256). Travelling on by the rocky coast, a little water-course which ran on the beach, afforded a small plant, perhaps a species of Chara (257); and on the sand near by, a Chenopodium (258), the only plants of which I took specimens. It was now past noon; the day was very sultry, and I, having recommenced my journey this morning long before sunrise, was tired, wet, and hungry, in a desolate and wild place, when I realized a conviction which had been for the last hour gaining ground in my mind, that I was alone. I retraced my steps to the sand-hills, and sought about, and shouted repeatedly, but all in vain; nought but the loud dash of the billow, as it broke on the lonely strand, with now and then a melancholy wail of the sandpiper, burst on my expectant ear. My natives somehow had strayed into another direction or lagged behind, so that I saw nothing more of them until after sunset on Tuesday the 15th, when they joined me on the outer beach of Wangarei Bay. During these two days I managed to subsist on some shell-fish from the rocks, the scanty sarcocarp of the fruit of the Corynocarpus lævigatus, Forst. (the large kernel of this fruit being in its raw state an active poison) and the inner young leaves of Areca sapida, Sol.; this latter plant affords good eating, a bonne bouche to any one in my situation. My natives were exceedingly happy the next night on finding that I was safe, as they knew not what had become of me. To their honour I would relate, that though they were bearers of provisions, yet they would not touch a morsel during the two days we were separated from each other, knowing that I was without food; saying, “What! shall we eat while our father is starving?” Like myself, they had subsisted on the shell-fish and the fruit before mentioned. 
The remainder of my journey is briefly told. On the morning of the 16th we travelled on to Te Ruakaka, a village a few miles from the south shore of Wangarei Bay; where we were hospitably received, and made a hearty breakfast. Hence we crossed Wangarei Bay in a small canoe, running no little risk in so doing. Proceeding thence by the line of coast, we safely reached the Bay of Islands, on the 22nd of February; with, I dare hope, thankful hearts to our Heavenly Father for all his mercies. 
I did not observe anything new in Botany during these few last days; in fact, I did not particularly look after anything, for I had often gone over the ground to Wangarei; and I much wished to reach the Bay of Islands, with the least delay possible, in consequence of the disturbed state of that district. 
Thus, my dear Sir William, I have endeavoured to give you a faithful outline of my rambling journey. And although I have extended this present communication, written by snatches, to a much greater length than was originally contemplated, it will after all, I fear, be considered very deficient in point of satisfactory information. I have also, I confess, great reason to apprehend that many of the specimens, fondly cherished by me as new may after all be well known to you; notwithstanding I hope to be forgiven for thus presuming too much, in this my novitiate; when you kindly consider my situation, here at the antipodes, not only without, but far away from, books of reference. My errors of conjecture, too, in venturing an opinion as to what genus certain unknown plants may belong, I trust, for the same assignable reason, will also be charitably construed. Making then, every fair deduction, I think there are still grounds for hoping that a portion of these plants will prove quite new to science. 
In conclusion, my dear Sir William, wishing you the same amount of pleasure in looking over, as I had in gathering and putting up for you, the specimens now sent, 
Allow me once more to subscribe myself, 
Very sincerely and faithfully yours, 
	WILLIAM COLENSO. 


specimens with () a cross on the labels are found between Warekahika and Turanga. 

† specimens with (†) from Turanga. to Waikare Lake and Rotorua. 


 # 



 
1 December 1842
Paihia, Bay of Islands, New
Zealand, Decr. 1st 1842. 
Sir W. Jackson Hooker, K. H. 
etc. etc. etc. 
Royal Botanic Gardens,
KEW
London

My dear Sir William,
Feverish with excitement and apprehension, lest the vessel now about to leave this Bay should sail without my letter, I hasten to inform you that I have this morning succeeded in finally closing and shipping another Case of Botanical and other specimens for you, which I hope will before this day six months, be safely in your possession. 
A few days ago your truly excellent letter of April 19/42, came to hand, together with your valuable case of Books, all in good condition. I hardly know how to express the very deep sense of the obligation you have afresh imposed upon me in thus sending me these works; especially, too, as I cannot possibly have it in my power to make a step towards the shadow of a return. And, whilst I can, in some measure, appreciate the very exceeding degree of kind feeling which prompted you to send me your own valuable copies of De Candolle and Don, I can but regret that you should have done so, as you have (in the former at least) deprived yourself of your many remarks contained therein. I sincerely hope that your health has been quite restored, so that this will find you at your usual and delightful employment again. 
You will, however, my dear Sir William, be pleased to use that small cheque in purchasing any other works for me, which, when you scan the list of my Botanical library herewith sent (in compliance with your pressing request), you may deem serviceable. I should wish, Endl. Norf. Irld.; Br. Prodr. with beginning; Forster’s 2 books; Lindley’s Orchideæ; and most particularly your new work on Ferns. Together with some useful work on Conchology and Entomology: – Swainson’s Shells, Cab. Cyclop., Jardine’s Entomology, 7 vols. £2.2.0. (unless it is exclusively British), Newman’s Introd. to the Study of Insects; and White’s Selborne (latest Ed.). I see a new transl. of Cuvier’s Le Regne Animal, advertised in Fraser (published by Henderson) in 8 vols. 8vo. with colored engravings for £8.8.0. – Could you ascertain for me whether this Ed. is superior to that of Whitaker’s published some time ago. I perceive also, a “Conchologia Systematica”, advertised (published by Longman) at the enormous price of £7.4.0! Should I too far intrude on your valuable time in asking you to inform me as to the real value of this work. 
I last wrote you in Septr. 41; in which I stated that I intended visiting the E. Cape district, in the then approaching Summer. I did so; and you will, I trust, perceive, when you receive the Case with what success. There are certainly more than 600 different specimens enclosed; among which are 30 new ferns! I do not, however, wish you to understand me to mean that there are 600 new species, but perhaps after making every deduction there may be, including Mosses and Algæ, somewhere about 1/3 of that number. Be it, however, as it may I am very sure of this that you will be highly gratified in the receipt of this lot, and will fully exculpate me from being considered idle. I rejoice to have discovered the fruit of the only remaining known Pine (Kawaka, nom. vulg. incol.); 2, if not 3, additional species of Fagus with the flowers of the one formerly sent; – 2 or 3, new species of Lauraceæ; – 1 of Coriaria 1 of Gaultheria; – 1 of Urtica – 1 of ?Cyrtandraceæ; several (I hope) of Epilobium; of Plantago, and of Ranunculus – 2 of Dracophyllum; – 2 of Violaceæ; 4, or more, of Licopodium; – nearly 30 of Filices – 1 of ?Myrsine; – several of Coprosma; – a number of Compositaceæ; – 1, or more, of Veronica; – 1 of Rhamneæ; 5, or more, of Orchideæ, &c. &c. &c. – but enough: You will have a quan. suff. of work for some time, merely to go through them. The Ferns I have ventured to describe (in English) for the “Tasman. Philos. Society”; Lady Franklin, as well as the Secretary, having written to me, urging a contribution, &c. &c. It is possible that some of them may be already known and published; they are not, however, in Cunningham’s Precursor; and their Hab. alrnost precludes the possibility of their ever having been found in New Zealand. If, however, I have adopted those of any Botanist, I have done so quite unwittingly, and trust I shall be ever most ready to make the amends honorable in the fullest manner. 
My Mss., enclosed in the case, are prolix enough! and will, I hope, give you all needful information. I have been, indeed, a long while in getting this lot ready, and am happy in bringing it to a close. 
You will also find, 2 or 3 shells, Fossils, Siliceous Deposits, &c. (The Shells I should wish you to get published in some one of the Nat. Hist. periodicals of the day). Some Fossil Bones of a monstrous bird; (1. an imperfect Femur from Waiapu, 2. a Femur, and 3. a Joint of the Vertebræ, from Turanga, these are all small; I have written a paper on them for the Tasmanian Society, and transcribed you a copy of the same which you may also (if you deem it worthy) get published for the amusement of the Cabinet scavans of Europe). A Bird, of the Ardea family) for the Museum of the Linn. Soc. A Mat of Native manufacture (which, with your kind permission I have designed for Lady Hooker; hoping that her Ladyship will be pleased to do me the honor of accepting the same. It was one which I obtained from one of the principal Chiefs of Wakawitira, and is a first rate and quite new article, and will bear good washing, the same, in fact, as any article of Clothing. These Mats are getting very scarce, and will soon be unknown. I have scarcely occasion to say, that the whole of the Material is Phormium save the tufts of colored wool; the pattern and dyes of the border are entirely of native origin). Two Books, the N. Testament and. the Book of Com. Prayer, in the N. Zealand Language for your Library (which egotism apart, I may truly say are my own work) &c. 
By the bye, I intend, as early as possible, to send you specimens of all my Shells, and Insects, for the Museum of the Linn. Society. The Bird now sent was taken at Tauranga, Bay of Plenty, in 1838; the Natives, however appear to be quite ignorant of it. 
I confess I felt somewhat disappointed in not seeing any other plants delineated (from among those I had sent you) than those contained in part IX of your “Icones Plantarum” already described by Cunn. As, from your first letter, I had been led to anticipate that some of the newly discovered species (Orchideæ &c.) would have speedily been published. Perhaps, it is entirely owing to my having fondly supposed certain plants to be new, which you subsequently found not to be so; or, it may be, after all, that such are described in former parts of your “Ic. pl.” those you kindly sent me being Nos. VII, VIII, IX. 
I return you No. 26 of the “Journal of Botany”, which evidently was sent in mistake for No. 25; a No. in which I am deficient, and which I would thank you to send me at earliest convenience, as it contains a portion of J. Smith’s Genera of Ferns. 
I will also, my dear Sir William, venture to make another request, – namely, that you will kindly procure and send me an eyeglass set in tortoiseshell, No. 4, power, and an extra glass, to suit, No. 5, power. My sight is good, closely, but I can not clearly discriminate anything at a 100 yards distance; for instance the shape of the leaves of a large tree; or plants on the sides of a river, unless I happen to know them by their general outline. It is, however, an old defect of sight, and not one now commencing. 
I have received a letter from Mr. Heward, kindly informing me of what my plants were, which I sent to Cunningham, &c. By this opportunity I answer his letter, in which I have said that I dare venture to say you would not fail to remember him with specimens of those plants in this parcel of which you might receive duplicates. Apropo Mr. Heward has adopted the very manner of sending me seriatim, the names of the plants I had sent to A.C. which I should be most happy to receive from you. I mean, in reference to unknown species and especially with regard to Mosses and Algæ, &c. for which purpose I have even numbered all specimens sent. As I am still ignorant of several plants sent to you in my first parcels. 
Ere this I hope you have been rejoiced with the safe and happy return of your son, Dr. Jos. Hooker. I look forward with much pleasure to a publication of his discoveries in the Botany of those interesting Islands which he has been privileged to visit. Pray present my very kind regards to him and assure him nothing short of being “quite driven up for time”, prevents me writing him a line by this vessel. 
I don’t know when an opportunity may offer by which I may send you any living plants. Shipping rarely ever leave this place for England, there being no return Cargo. And to send them to Sydney, N. S.W., and there to be wharfed or cellared by an Agent, just like other goods a la colonie, for no one knows how indefinite a period (witness my last box of specimens upwards of months getting to England) would be of little avail. I have a nice lot of young Wangarei-Fagus plants, which I brought from those woods; and still hope, one day, to meet with an opportunity of transmitting them to England. Let me know, when you again write, what genera or species, would be considered a desiderata; and tell me what seeds you particularly wish for Kew Gardens. 
I have a plan under consideration of publishing, at no very distant period, a synopsis of the Ferns of New Zealand, with drawings of the most curious species. What is the charge, per 1000 copies per sheet of 12ms. for printing, &c. and what for lithographing? after the manner, for instance, of your Journal of Botany. 
Every post brings news; and almost every scientific work of the present day, contains somewhat destructive to some of the Classes, Genera or Species of its predecessor. Most particularly, I think, is this remark applicable to the alterations which Botany is continually undergoing, and which at present appears to threaten the whole group of Filices. As far, however, as I understand the matter at present, I cannot perceive what great advantage is to be gained by this total upsetting of all the old-established genera, and consequent approximation towards a Lethean consignrnent of Linnæus, Swartz, Forster, Brown, Cunningham, and all other working botanists who richly merited their hardly-earned honours! Nor do I see that this new method is a whit more natural than the old one (vide, J. Smith’s remarks on Hecistopheris, in Lond. Journ. Bot. Part IV, p.194 “On viewing its forked tree, &c. &c.). It is this method, or rather anything but method, that causes, in my humble opinion, so much confusion in the different Natural Sciences. Every disciple seeks to supplant his master; and thus to establish a novelty of his own which is as equally certain to share the same fate. I much wish I had No. 25 of the “Jour. of Bot” that I might the more fully be able to comprehend the line of reasoning which Mr. J. Smith adopts for making his proposed alterations. I intend, however, to give a little attention to the matter, among the Ferns; after which I shall be better enabled to speak on the subject. 
I had a specimen of my new sp. of Phormium for you; – but, alas! during my 3 months absence, some plaguey rats completely destroyed it, together with some other choice things. I hope, however, to procure more soon. Your son has seen it in flower in my garden. 
Is anyone carrying on the continuation of Don’s work? I would cheerfully subscribe £10. 10. 0, towards the completion of the same. 
You enquire concerning “the seed that produces oil”. – I am only aware of 2 seeds ever being used by the natives for that purpose: namely, the fruits of Alectryon excelsum (vide, specimens now sent) and of Passiflora tetrandra Solr., the oil from both of which was expressed by heating. – The former, however, was most generally used, as it yielded most oil. It is possible that the Natives at the Southern end of the Island may have some plant among them, whose seed produces oil, but such is unknown to the natives of these paths. The fruit of Alectryon excelsum has a most elegant appearance when ripe; its subapicular glossy black seed is almost enveloped within the large tempting-looking carmine-coloured arillus, which, appearing through the bursting crested pericarp, reminds the observer of that delicious fruit of his Father’s land, Rubus idæus. 
The resin of the Dammara australis, is not employed here, (save by myself in making yellow-basilicon ointment (in lieu of voting) but the American vessels trading hither formerly purchased all they could get, which they took to America, and from which, it was said, obtained a varnish little inferior to Copal. A respectable settler, who has resided here several years has sold a great many casks of the Dammara resin to these American traders, for which, however, they gave a very limited price. It is worthy of obs. that this resin has never been collected from existing Dammara forests, but always from barren waste lands, which, doubtless were, ages ago, primæval forests of enormous pines. – The very small quantity found about the living trees would scarcely pay the expense of collecting it. 
I dare say that what you saw “in the papers”, respecting the “oil-producing seed”, was from some person connected with the N.Z. Land Company; or some such association. I have, myself, seen astonishing things inserted in the papers respecting the production of N.Z., even in those printed here, on the very spot! which I knew to be perfectly incorrect. I fear much of this is done in the present “puffing age” in the way of an enticing bait. 
Really, however, my dear Sir William, I must conclude: I hope I shall not have exhausted your patience, nor taken up too much of your valuable time, in trespassing on you with my interminable scribbling. – I must hurry off to the post, near 8 miles dist., – Adieu! and believe me, ever to be
Yours very faithfully and sincerely,
W. COLENSO. 

Botl. Library. 
Lindley’s Introd., 3rd ed. 
– Nat. Sys., 2nd Ed. 
Don, 4 vols. 
De Candolle. 6 vols. 
Smith’s Introd. (Hook.)
Musci Exot. 
Hooker’s Brit. Fil. 
Comp. to Bot. Mag., vols. I. II. 
Journ. of Bot. I. 
ditto, Nos. – 1-32 (No. 25, wanting)
ditto Nos. 1-4	
Icones plant. – parts 7, 8, 9
Genera Filicum – parts, 6-10. 
Bot. Illustrations 	ed. I. 
  ″	″ 	ed. II. 
Cunn’s. “Precursor” in Ann. N. H. 
Enumeratio Filicum, to Todea

and one or two small books. 
Rennie’s Alph. of Bot. 
Rattray’s Bot. Chart. 
&c. 
I wish a good work of species, on containing what is not in Don: – the Monochlamydeous & Monocotyledonous plants; together with the Filices; Musci & Hepaticæ & Algæ. 
W.C. 


I would call yr. attention, my dear Sir William to the small samples of Bark and Ext. of Bark, now sent; and hope that you may be able to get them speedily analysed: and inform me as to what they really are. 
Wm. Colenso

 # 

10 May 1843
Bay of Islands, New Zealand. 
May 10, 1843.
Sir W. J. Hooker, K. H., LLD., &c &c
Kew Gardens
nr. London

My dear Sir William
HMS “Tortoise”, after hybernating on our shores for the last 12 months, being about to return to England at rather an earlier period than I had been led to expect, hurries me to seize the very favourable opportunity thus afforded, through the courtesy of her Captain, to send you my long Cabin of living plants; – together with some seeds, and Dried specimens. I very deeply regret, however, that my living plants are not quite the kinds which I would wish them to be; the reason why they are not so, is simply this. – knowing the Tortoise was on the Coast, near the Thames, taking in spars, and intending to send by her when she returned home, I kept making enquiries during the summer as to the month when she would be likely to sail – wishing to defer (if possible) the taking up of my young plants until after the hot weather had passed. About six weeks ago, I received a letter from the harbour-master at Auckland, (who had kindly promised to take charge of and send on my plants to the Tortoise,) informing me that my Plant Cabin should be with him on or about the 15th of June next. Last month I finished filling seven of my nine boxes, intending the two remaining ones for Orchideæ, &c., when, last week, to my utter astonishedment, the Tortoise sailed into this Bay to obtain supplies on her way home! Consequently, I am all but quite unprepared. I hasten, however, my dear Sir William, to send you such as I can collect together at so unexpected a notice, taking all my choice plants out of my Garden, in order to make up deficiencies. 
The enclosed List of species, &c., will shew what is in the boxes, the whole of which I am happy in finding in a very healthy state. I feel not a little gratified in being able to send you so many plants of my large-leaved Fagus, which, with no little difficulty, I have brought from the high dry woods near Wangarei Bay, E. Coast. – As well, as my graceful Compositaceous Shrub, and handsome new Viola, from the mountains nr. Waikare Lake; both which I raised from Seed in my garden; unfortunately I have only a single plant of each. I shall, indeed, be greatly gratified, here-after, to learn that these Plants have all arrived in health. My ?Discaria from Poverty Bay, newly discovered Cordyline, and fine new ?Malvaceous plant from the interior I am obliged, much against my will to omit sending of, they having attained to too large a size for my boxes. I sent you, however, a quantity of fine seed of the former, and I have planted in box No. IX a slip of the latter, which may take root and grow. 
Among the Dried Specimens, you will, I think, find a few which may prove acquisitions. At length I have been rewarded with fine specimens of the Kawaka pine, with ripe fruit; of which I send you plenty. This is now the 2nd Coniferous plant of N. Zealand; and by far the handsomest, especially in its young state. I was obliged to hire a Native, and, going a long journey into the forests on the mountains, to fell two trees ere I obtained the object of my solicitude. – I could not, however, perceive any vestige of male flowers. A Coprosma, Gymnogramma, Asplenium, Dicksonia (arborescent), some Mosses, Fungi, and Jungermanniæ, and a curious minute plant apparently uniting Stylideæ and Lobeliaceæ will be found among the new species. – 
Time, however, flies; so I must briefly mention them, seriatim. – 
Dried Specimens, etc. 
No 1. A Ranunculus from low wet lands, near the head of Manukau Bay, W. Coast; Jany, 1843. 
2.) Hypericum, – from same locality. 
3. Adiantum – from dry woods near Tamaki Creek, River Thames, E. Coast; Jany. 1843. 
4. Hydrocotyle, – from a bog near ditto. 
5. Specimens of a small slender Tree, 10-18 feet, from dry woods near Tamaki Creek; Jany. 1843. A species, or, perhaps, variety, of a shrub sent in last parcel, No. 422. Among the scoria, on the N.E. side of Manukau Bay, that shrubby species is common; A quantity of the fruit of which is now sent, and some sown in No. VIII. 
6. Dracophyllum, – from Te Ẁau, N. shore of Manukau Bay: – a small diffuse tree with long branches, 10-14 feet high; perhaps a variety of No. 249 sent in last lot, from same locality. 
7. Doodia Kunthiana? from same locality as No. 3. 
8. Specimens of a Compositaceous plant, which I first met with some years ago on the shores of the B. of Islands, and supposed to be introduced; subsequently seen near Auckland in the Thames, and again at Otahuhu, E. Coast; Jany. 1843: Still, I think, it may have been introduced. 
9. Spinous calyx’d Compositaceous plant / from dunghills near Auckland; 
l0.) Peculiar Cruciferous plant,  )   growing with No. 8: 			                        perhaps introd. 
11. Filiform Juncus		)  from Te Ẁau, 
12) Triglochin		)  Manukau Bay; Jany. 1843
13. Gramineæ, common in bogs, shores, Manukau Bay. growing with No. 8: perhaps introd. 
14. Specimens of a shrub numbered 248 in last lot, much in same state as those then sent; from Te Ẁau; Manukau Bay. – I went purposely thither, in Jany. last, in hopes of getting sps., in some other state than on the former occasion, but was unsuccessful. 
15. Cyperus, – the plant referred to by me, in my Mss. of Journey, as being the C. fulvus of R. Br., growing thickly on banks of Waikato river. 
16 ) 
17 ) Jungermannia, from dark caves among the scoria. N.E. shore of Manukau Bay. 
18. Jungermannia from bog, with 4 and 13. 
19. Peculiar little plant with Hydrocotyle-like fruit, from a salt marsh, head of Manukau Bay; Jany. 1843. 
20. Galium, – from same locality, as 4 and 13. 
21. A very fine and. beautiful Moss from dark Caves among the scoria. (with 16 and 17) Jany. 1843. 
23. Leucopogon Fraseri in fruit; growing plentifully on scoria: Jany. 1843. – Seed of this now sent, a pretty scented plant. 
22. A creeping Fern from same locality as preceding: could not detect it anywhere in Fruit. 
24.) Pimelea, a fine shrubby tree, 4-6 feet high, with large dark purple fruit; found growing on shores of creeks Head of Manukau Bay; Jany. 1843. – a n. sp?
25) Pimelea shrub 2-3 feet, leaves shorter, habit more diffuse and somewhat prostrate; same locality as preceding. 
26) Coprosma crassifolia, n. sp. Foliis ellipticis orbiculatisqe (3-5 lineas longis) obtusis fasciculatis lævibus carnosis petiolatis supra concavia subtus pallidioribus, margine revolutis integerrimis rubiscentibus, petiolus pubescentibus purpureocoloratus, Fructus solitarilis ad apicem ramulosum subsessilibus, glabris viridi-maculatis. Sepalis, monophyllus circumscriptus seu 2-4 angulatis irregularitiaque persistens, Ramis brachiatis rigidis adscendentibus glabris. – 
A rigid growing shrub, or small tree, 4-6 feet high. Hab. among scoria and rocky spots, shores of Manukau Bay, W. Coast; Jany. 1843. – a species closely allied to C. rhamnoides and C. divaricata. Flores nondum vidi. W.C., in Tasman. Philos. Journ., 1843. 
27. An Astelia from the woods at the Kawakawa, Bay of Islands. 
28. Specimens of a slender graceful Araliaceous Tree, of diffuse rambling growth, 3-5 feet high; from deep forests, head of Kawakawa. 
29. A small Compositæ, found growing sparingly, yet in tufts, among the fern by the roadside near Auckland, Jany. 1843: not obsd. in any other locality. 
30. Specimen from a forest on the banks of the R. Wairua: perhaps identical with No. 28. 
31) A Lomaria. I send you this curious and unique specimen to shew the plant which I have ever considered as L. lanceolata and which will be found, I think, to differ much from that larger plant fig. by you in your “Icones plantm.” (Tab. CDXXIX) as L. lanceolata as well as from the sp. I sent in my last lot numbered 266. – The specimen now sent, I obtained from the low shaded side of a rivulet running through a wood, where countless numbers of Filices luxuriated abundantly. I took it almost purposely to prove, that this species when fully developed and growing in the most favorable situations is invariably small: a conclusion which I was led to several years ago. This small sp. was, also, considered by A. Cunningham, when here in 1838, as the true L. lanceolata. 
32 A specimen of a fine fresh-water Algæ which was very crisp and looked incomparably lovely when fresh: from a deep and rapid rivulet near the head of Wangarei Bay, E. Coast; March, 1843. 
33.)Specimen of a handsome arborescent Dicksonia (D. gracilis, n. sp.) discovered in March, 1843, in a low wood near the R. Wairua, in the interior. The trunk of this Fern is small, 2-4 feet in height, the fronds, 4-7 feet in length, are much lighter than those of any other of the N. Zealand species, and the petioles are long being 1-3 feet in length, and very slender. It appears to approach very near D. lanata,W.C. which species is not, however, arborescent. The fronds, as they get old, become quite glabrous. – 
34. Small specimens of a Compositaceous plant, from shores of Wangarei Bay; perhaps identical with No. 342 in last parcel. 
35. specimens of Marsileaceæ, from the midst of a deep wood, where a fire had been, in the interior, a few miles SSE. from Waiomio. 
36. A specimen of Alseuosmia, which, while possessing affinity with A. palæformis, appears to me to be a very distinct species, widely differing in habit, &c. This being very erect & rarely branched. From a dry wood, road from Wangarei to the Bay of Islands; March 1843. 
37. A Lomaria, probably L. rotundifolia, W.C., from same locality as No. 31., – I have not time to examine & compare them. 
38. Hymenophyllum, from same locality as No. 36; epiphytical on trees: perhaps a var. of H. sanguinolentum. 
[H. polyanthus var. sanguinolentum]. 
39. A portion of a specimen, in fruit, of a very slender and small tree, which, from its very beautiful green leaves, has often attracted my attention in the woods in my last journey. I obtained a sp. in fruit, which I divide with you. Tree, 4-5 feet high. 
40. A little procumbent and ascending plant, from the alluvial banks of the R. Wairua, where it grows in patches: March, l843. 
41. Fragment of a white Moss-like Jungermannia, which grows thickly in bogs concealed among rushes, near the River Wairua. 
42. Fragment of a Myriophyllum, from the bed of the R. Wairua; hooked up while passing in a canoe. 
43. Another fragment of a small slender Tree or shrub, from same locality as No. 36; unfortunately possessing neither flower nor fruit. I think I noticed the same plant in the forest on the mountains, near Waikare Lake, in Decr. 1841. 
44. Specimens in fruit of an elegant Tree (vide, No. 335 in last lot for same in flower.) from woods on the high range of hills near Waipuakakaho in the interior, March, 1843. I send you, also, a quantity of its fruit in a parcel (although I fear they were not quite ripe when gathered) and, in box No. VI, two fine plants. 
45. Specimens with ripe fruit of the Kawaka pine, procured from same locality with preceding. I, also, send a portion of the wood of this tree, and a quantity of its cones & seeds. In the boxes of plants, Nos, VI and VII, I have sown several seeds, in hopes of them vegetating on their way to England, I feel particularly anxious to introduce this truly elegant Pine into our shrubberies, and shall be much gratified to hear of my efforts to do so being crowned with success. You will find a number of its seeds also scattered among the sheets containing Dried specimens. 
46. Sundry Alseuosmiæ; among which there may be a n. species, at least I thought so when I gathered them; from same locality as No. 36. I, also, send a quantity of fruit & seeds of several species of this Genus, which I much wish to be well-known at home. It is one of my favourites; the woods are often really redolent with its fragrant and powerful odour. It is, however, by no means an easy matter to distinguish the species. Perhaps, No. 14, now sent, and No. 248, in last parcel, may belong to this Genus?
47. An additional specimen of Ixerba brexioides, A. Cunn., from the skirts of a wood near the R. Wairua. This tree is the only one I had hitherto seen in the N. parts of this Island; from it I obtained those specimens sent you in 1839. From its possessing at this time (March, 1843.) fruit nearly ripe and flowers unfolded. I was led to conclude it fruited twice in a year, which is the case with several N.Z. plants. I send you, also, some fruit and seeds, which I am very desirous may grow; as the tree is truly an elegant one; and, as Cunningham says, “of very rare occurrence”. 
48. An epiphytical Orchideous plant, whose flowers possess a very powerful and somewhat peculiar odour. I have, I think, already sent you specimens of this plant in a former parcel. Dry Woods, Bay of Islands and Wangarei, Flows. in Feby. & March. 
49. A large epiphytical Moss pendent on branches of trees overhanging the R. Wairua; March, 1843. 
50. Specimens of the foliage of a small tree, 20 feet in height, discovered growing on the banks of the R. Wairua, in March, l843, neither however in flower nor fruit. This tree has much of the habit of the different species of Mida. It may be Olea apetala, a tree of rare occurrence in N. Zealand, and of which I have not a good description at hand. 
51. Sundry small parasitical Fungi; see, also, a small parcel No. 51. 
52. Specimen of a fine parasitical ?Jungermannia, growing on Trees and roots, humid woods, interior. 
53. Specimens of a fine Viscum (V. antarcticum?) which grows on several small trees on the banks of R. Waikare, Bay of Islands. Jany. 1843. 
54. Myrsine divaricata, A. Cunn., in fruit, from same locality as preceding, Jany. 1843. 
55. A Coprosma, from same locality, which to me, at the time, of gathering, appeared to be a new species, perhaps between C. propinqua and C. acerosa. A shrub, 6-10 feet; fruiting in great profusion; fruit, size of a large pea, glassy white streaked with blue, and sweetish to the taste. Jany. 1843. 
56. Veronica diosmifolia, A. Cunn., with preceding. 
57. Young fruit of Alectryon excelsum. 
58.)Specimens of Hoheria populnea before flowg. Jan/43
59. A curious little plant from the stony bed of a rivulet between the Bay of Islands and the Waimate Mission Station; Jany. 1843; where it grew submerged in cæspitose patches. I have been much amused and gratified in observing the beautiful membranaceous and ciliated corolla, and curiously formed hooded style and stigma of this plant. I kept several alive for some weeks, and found, that the slightest possible touch of any fine point on the cucullate organ which was doubled down over the head of the style, &c., invariably caused it to expand with a sudden spring. I have considered it as ranging between the Natl. orders Lobeliaceæ and Stylideæ. 
60.)A single, and rather imperfect, specimen of what I have considered to be a n. sp. of Asplenium from the ravines among the scoria at the head of Manukau Bay, W. Coast; Jany. l843. A species having close affinity with both A. lucidum, and . A. oblongifolium W.C. in Tasm. philos. Journ., Feb. 1843. 
61) An elegant little Gymnogramme, the only one hitherto detected in N. Zealand. From same locality as preceding. G. Nova Zelandiæ, W.C., in Tasrn. philos. Journ., 1843. 
62. Specimen of a curious little Aquatic plant, from streams near Manukau Bay; Jany. l843. Identical with those discovd. at Turanga in Decr. /41, and which I sent you in my last parcel, No. 33. 
63. Portion of a specimen of a Compositaceous shrub, 4-9 feet high, generally found growing on the banks of rivers; called by the Natives, Makaka. 
64. Puffball Fungi, from the pathway side among fern, near Wangarei. Found growing in dense clusters. 
65. Flabelliform laciniated Fungi, parasitical on prostrate trees, in wet woods near Wangarei. 
66. Elegant succulent white cellular fungi, parasitical on old rotten timber in wet woods. A truly elegant sp. in its living state. 
67.)
68.) Mosses from among Scoria, head of Manukau Bay. 
69.)
70. A Mniarum from same locality; (perhaps M. biflorum); of this plant a quantity of fruit and seed is sent, It always grows in dry barren rocky & exposed spots. 
I enclose a scrap of a peculiar little Fern I found, in plenty but without fruit, in the cave where I obtained the Moss and Fern. Nos. 21 and 22, I have more of it somewhere, but cannot find it just now. 
My last letter, accompanying my Mss. dried specimens, etc., I despatched on the 1st, of Decr. last. I hope all then sent, have, ere this, safely reached England. The last Letter I have received from you was dated April, 1842. I am beginning to look out quite anxiously for another such kind and welcome epistle. Should you not have forwarded me the Books, mentioned in my last, I hope, my dear Sir William, you will cause your Bookseller speedily to do so. 
I enclose, in the parcel, some specimens of the Dammara resin, which has, of late, been eagerly purchased by the American Merchant vessels, at 4d½ per. lb. One old settler has collected and sold between 20 and 30 tons! Buried in the mud among Avicennia tomentosa, and among dry Algæ and weeds above high-water mark, are the places where it is found in the largest quantities; the accumulations, doubtless, of ages. In rushy barren lands, it, also, abounds, imbedded in the soil. It is a curious fact, that in the S. parts of this Island, and in Stewart’s Island, where the Dammara is not to he found, this Resin is to be obtained. 
[A pencil annotation appears to read “Not confirmed Jy 1864 JDH” – Ed] 
I hope the living plants will do well on the passage, Shou1d there be any sorts among them not now required at the Botanical Gardens, or a greater number of any species than may be admissible, such may, I think, be fairly sold (unless deemed worthy of presentation to, and acceptation by, any British or Foreign Botanical Public Garden,) to any Nobleman or Gentleman, or any of the Horticulturists, defray the actual expenses of the same, which, strange as it may appear, amount to nearly £10. – 
I hope soon to see your new work on the Filices and a general revision of (at least) the Coniferæ and Taxaceæ of New Zealand, which, although few, are, at present, very erroneously described. 
What a fine opportunity the officers of the Tortoise must have had, of getting specimens? and yet, I fear, they made no collections!
And now, dear Sir William, I must once more close; and hasten off to the post on the opposite shore. It is now 3 p.m. and the post closes at 4. The Box of plants was shipped safely last evening. 
With very kind regards
Believe me 
My dear Sir William,
Very truly Yours
W. Colenso

 # 

17 May 1843
Paihia, Bay of Islands
			   New Zealand, May 17/43

J. D. Hooker, Esq., M. D. 
	&c &c &c. 
						
My dear friend,
The “Tortoise” being, delayed, through a very severe gale from the S.E., affords me just time to scribble you a Letter, which I hope will find you safe and well among your friends. I have often followed you in imagination since I last saw you; and hope you will have been truly fortunate in discovering and collecting. I need not say, you were often wished present, in my long route over the hills in the interior, in the summer of 1841-42. If my plants, &c., (sent by me to your Father) have safely reached him, you may be able to gather something of my journey from the hurriedly-got-up Ms. sent by me in the case of specimens: – and you will find that I have remembered you in naming a lovely species of Asplenium after you. As it is now more than 12 mths., since the date of the last received of your Father’s letters, I expect to hear from him by every fresh arrival, and, at last, to hear of you. For, although I much wish it, I can scarcely expect to hear from you for some time, at least, after your arrival in old Engd. Immediately after my return from my Southd. Journey, I wrote a letter to Sydney, to Dr. Sinclair, in hope of finding him: this letter has recently been returned to me, with “not to be found”, stamped on it. I heard of Sinclair’s having been in the E. Cape neighbourhood, where I hope he did well – and where I yet anticipate doing somewhat. I flatter myself, I have gained, at least, 30 additional Ferns, most of which you will see in the Cases sent. Tell me, when you can find a spare moment, how your Alseuosmia’s (living plants) succeeded? I have not been able to get any of the seeds you kindly left to grow. I sincerely hope that the young trees & seeds now sent will reach England in living & healthy state. What a splendid opportunity has been afforded to the officers of the Tortoise, during her 12 months & upwards in New Zealand, of getting good and numerous specimens of almost every thing within reach – I fear, however, that they have not done so. Although I have discovered several Orchideæ, since you left, I have not yet seen Gastrodia; and can but think you a very lucky fellow, to fall in with your specimens. It was sought for by Allan Cunningham without success. – I anticipate the pleasure of seeing a published account of the Botany (at least) of your voyage: should such be published by subscription, I should be most happy to become a subscriber. 
Apropo, I have lately married: so that should you be led so far from home again as New Zealand, I have it, I hope, in my power now, to give you to daily lodging and a most hearty welcome. 
You know the Waimate Station: well, I go thither in a few days, to reside with the Bishop for a few months, previous to ordination. I think you know my mind – to be devoted to the welfare of the poor Natives. As a recreation, however, Botany is, and will be, my darling pursuit. It is almost certain that I shall be sent by His Lordship to some distant part of this – or of the other Islands of the N.Z. group – but where I cannot say: it is all one to me, however, go where I may. The wilder and more unfrequented by the white, the better, so that I have planty of Natives about me. A nine years’ residence on the shores of this beautiful Bay will not fail to cause me regret in leaving. – Anon. –
Do you know anything of Dieffenbach? I have heard that Bidwell is married – he has lately published (in the Tasman. Journ.,) a notice of a peculiar & new species of Pine of his discovery, which will, I think, from what he himself says, need confirmation. 
And now, my dear friend, I must bid you once more Farewell! – Let me have a scratch from your quill, at some convenient season. And
Believe me ever –
	Most sincerely and affectionately
		Yours
			W. Colenso
 # 

7 March 1844
 St. John’s College, Waimate, N. Zealand. 
March 7th 1844. 
Sir W. J. Hooker K. G., &c. &c. &c. 
Royal Botanic Gardens,
Kew,
near London 

My dear Sir William,
Your very valuable and truly welcome letters of Feby. 16th and June 23rd/43 (and envelopes bearing date Feb. 23/43, containing a plate of Sphæria Taylori for my good friend Mr. Taylor), I have lately received, and have to thank you for them. I trust you have long ere this safely received the Case of dried specimens, etc., shipped by me in Dec. /42, to your address, via Sydney, and thence re-shipped by my agents, Messrs. Campbell & Co. (as per their letter of April 21st/43) “pr ‘Hamlet’ to London”: – and, also, my last letter to you, which, with a case of living plants, and a parcel of dried specimens and seeds, I did myself the pleasure of sending in May/43, pr. H.M.S. “Tortoise”. The Books, too – i.e., – Icones Plantarum, X, XI, – Lond. Journ. Bot., 5 to 18 incl., Gen. Filicum, pars. XI, XII, – Comp. Bot. Mag. I, II, and Dieffenbach’s 2 vols., – so kindly sent, have safely reached me – and I thank you greatly for them. 
I, also, thank you, my dear Sir William, from my heart, for the very full and interesting information relative to my very dear friend, your Son: – I have since heard of the return of the expedition to England; and hope, that you have had the unalloyed pleasure of receiving him again. During his long absence he has often indeed been thought on by the writer of this, and when the winds should howl and the waves roar, a prayer – sincere, at least – has ascended to Him who controls the rage of both winds and waves, for the Botanist of the Expedition. 
I am much pleased with your “Antarctic Botanical Information” and live in hopes of seeing much more on the same subject. I sowed some seeds of the “Cabbage”, kindly spared me by Dr. Hooker, in several different places and soils, but none, unfortunately, came up. Before, however, that I proceed to any other matter, let me go through your letter, seriatim; – and answer as well as I may from this place, your different questions therein contained. – 
Nos. 14 and 15 “Drimys axillaris” – Are not these two plants thus numbered widely different – at least, as species? the one, (15) a fine stout and full-branched tree of 30 feet and upwards; the other (14) a small slender tree of 12-20 feet. 
“16.” I have not, I regret to say, seen anything else but the leaf of this tree; I know but of one plant in this Island; the Natives say that there are several on the Islets lying off the E. Coast, known by the name of Taẁitirahi, or Poor Knights; I have often endeavoured to get specimens but in vain, although I have offered gold for them. 
“13 and 44” I hope you have found both flowers and fruit of these plants, in the subsequent parcels sent. 
“28”. Is certainly not (allow me to say) “Earina mucronata”: an Earina it may very possibly be, but not “mucronata”, from which plant it is very distinct. 
“35”. Is not (I should say, from memory) “Veronica diosmifolia” as that plant is very different both in size and habit: this species is only 2-3 feet high – that 6-10 feet, with branches very long and slender: this is only found on dry hills near the sea coast – that only on low land on the alluvial banks of rivers. I think, too, that the leaves of V. diosmifolia are generally, minutely “serrulate” – vide, A. Cunn. in Ann. Nat. Hist. –  
“41” Mr. Heward in his letter to me (I having sent this plant to A. . Cunningham) considers this a distinct sp. (L. Richii) and not “L. fasciculatus”, and I am quite inclined to agree with him. L. Richii is only found on rocky or sandy spots near the sea where it is a low thick and bushy shrub: while L. fasciculatus is generally found in, or near, woods, and is a graceful shrub of 5-12 feet in height. I have, however, subsequently sent you better specimens of this plant, so you will now be enabled to form your own judgment thereon. 
“43”. This Cruciferous plant is certainly not “introduced from Europe”, it is commonly found in low alluvial grounds, and was an article of food with the Natives long before the introduction of the Potatoe: – they call it, Toi. 
‘49”. Is certainly not “a var of Calystegia sepium”. The corolla of this pretty plant is scarcely larger than its Calyx. I have subsequently found this sp. plentifully at the southward. 
“57”. I have only detected this plant in that one spot mentioned in my former letter. It is a very delicate plant, with excessively thin light green leaves. 
“42”. Is “really wild”: the black berries of this plant were formerly (and are still) eaten by the Natives – as well as those of its congener, S. lanciniatum. 
 “58”. I have lately obtained several good specimens of this plant, which I shall send in next parcel. 
“74” Of this Goodenia, or “Selliera”, I will send you plenty of specimens by-and-bye. 
“75”. I will send you good specimens of this Drymaria in flower, having lately detected it growing plentifully in the more southern parts of the Island. 
You mention having “received from Dr. Sinclair a Calceolaria or Jovellanæ” which I suppose to be identical with the plant No. 9 discovered by me on the 26th Novr. /41, (whilst Dr. S. was in the Bay of Islands) and sent you in Decr. /42. If the plants should prove to be identical, I think I have the merit (if any there be) of being the discoverer of this pretty plant. 
Your “Ourisia macrophylla” is, I suppose, the same as my plant, No. 83, (in the large lot sent) although I have not the least recollection of my plant being “hirsutis” nor of its having its scape-leaves “sessile”: I hope it will have proved to be a distinct species. At all events, I shall be much gratified in hearing that the living specimen I sent you, pr. H.M.S. “Tortoise”, arrived in safety, and is flourishing at Kew. 
The “Sphæria Taylori” of Berkeley (Lond. Jour. Bot. vol. II., p.210) has been already described and figured, by the Rev. B. Taylor, as Innominata, in the Tasmanian Journal vol. I., p.308. I find Mr. Berkeley, remarking on Sph. Robertsii (p. 209), says, – “We are indebted to Mr. Dieffenbach for the knowledge of the moth to which the Larva belongs”! O tempora, O mores! I mentally exclaimed, when I read this for I had not only described but actually shewn Dieffenbach (who up to that time knew nothing of the Animal which produced the larvæ), specimens of the Moth; one of which  – of the very identical Moths which D. had handled – I subsequently sent you, and which you have mentioned in your Lond. Journ. Bot., Vol. I., p.304. – published nearly a year before this paper of Mr. Berkeley’s!! and about the same time before Dieffenbach’s 2 vols.!!!
I venture to regret your having given the new species of Thuja the specific name of “Doniana”, which I think (allow me to say), was quite undeserved by that gentleman. “It is” as you say, “singular, that Mr. Don and Mr. A. Cunningham should refer this plant, whose habit is so completely that of a Thuja to Dacrydium”. It having often in common parlance been compared, from its foliage, to the Arbor vitæ. 
In Tabs. xi, and xii, vol II. Lond. Journ. Bot., you have good figures of Panax arboreum and P. anomalum both N.Zealand Plants, but there is no mention of them in the numbers I have by me. I perceive they are drawn by your son, and suppose they must have been executed by him whilst here. P. anomalum, I think, I sent you long ago. 
Heward mentions (Lond. Journ. Bot., V. I., p.283) a sp. of Dicksonia (D. lævis) which he had received from A.Cunningham; what this plant can be I cannot divine, unless it proves to be (as C. speaking of this calls it a “third arborescent one”), an old frond of a sp. of Dicksonia which C. when here pronounced to be D. squarrosa; the fruitful fronds of which plant becomes smooth when old. I think it must be this plant, because I distinctly recollect Cunningham’s lamenting to me his not being able to get any other than old fructification of this fern; and because no other arboresoent N.Z. species was ever known to Cunningham, or found in the neighbourhood. If my supposition is correct, D. squarrosa must give way to D. lævis, or vice versa. If, again, my supposition is correct, and the plant supposed by Cunningham to be D. squarrosa, is not that species, D. lævis is, to say the least of it, a most inappropriate specific name for this plant; as its barren fronds are far more rough than those of any other fern in N. Zealand. 
I perceive another alteration (or addition?) has been made to the N. Zealand Doodiæ! D. Kunthiana (your own plant) has been metamorphosed into “D. lunulata” (Lond. Journ. Bot., vol. I., p.283). I am almost inclined to believe the whole of the hitherto known Doodiæ of N. Zealand to be merely varieties of one species. I hope, however, to give a little more attention to this subject ere long; but, if I mistake not, I mentioned my suspicion to your son when here, and I think he paid attention to the examination of living specs. of both Doodiæ and Niphobolus: if so, you will, before this, have known more of the real state of the matter than myself, though living in the Country. In my last parcel, I sent you a fine specimen of D. Kunthiana alias, “D. lunulata” alias  ––––
I am much indebted to you, my dear friend, for your useful remarks on my proposal of printing a Synopsis of the N.Z. Filices but I fear I shall not now be able to carry my plan into effect. In fact, your Species Filicum will in a manner supersede it, and more especially your proposed work on the Botany of N. Zealand and neighbouring Islands: to which I shall most gladly contribute my mite of assistance. I see you refer in your Sp. Filicum to your Gen. Fil. and as I have the 7 last parts from VI. to XII, incl., I would thank you, if possible, to send me the former ones also. The more so as the first parts contain several of the genera most common to N. Zealand. 
Thus, my dear Sir William, I think I have touched on all those points which required notice in your last letter. And now I will proceed to give you a brief outline of what plants I have obtained in my late journey. 
I left this place (where I have been residing several months; studying under the direction of the Bishop for Orders), in the early part of October last, on a Missionary visit to the Natives in the more Southern parts of the Island, and returned on the 15th ult. Much of my route was over the same ground as I went before, although I commenced my journey at “Castle point”, lying in 41o South. From that place to Waikare Lake is an entirely new Country, never having been visited by any scientific person. I was, however, on the whole, greatly surprised at my not meeting with more new plants than I did. Some of those I had the good fortune to discover are I think highly curious and some of genera, which, if not altogether new, are new to N. Zealand. The greater part of my collection (small as it is) is not yet come to hand, having sent them by vessel from Hawke’s Bay, but, I hope, ere long to go over the whole, and to send you a selection by an early opportunity (when I shall also send you all the duplicate specimens in my herbaria of plants already sent, and all the seeds which I may be able in the meanwhile to collect together). Among other things, I have several curious Mosses and Algæ many of which I believe you will find new and very interesting. I have, also, 2 (if not 3) new. sp. of Orchideæ  – one, a very fine and curious plant, upwards of 2 feet in height, differing widely from the hitherto-known Orchideæ of N. Zealand, bearing a large raceme of peculiarly mottled flowers on a leafless scape, the roots of which are large and tuberous and, formerly, in great request among the Natives as an article of food; I had sought this plant for several years, but without success, until this journey: – another, a fine n. sp. of Miosotis. Three ferns, which are quite new (at least to me) viz: – 1 each of Cyathea, Asplenium and Trichoman. and 4 others, of Grammitis, Dicksonia, Schizæa, and Gleichenia, which are doubtful. I enclose you specimens of the 3 first, in order that you may have them without loss of time for your Spec. Filicum. An elegant shrubby plant of Labiatæ (which extensive Natural Order has hitherto only been represented in N. Zealand by that dear little plant of a 1000 fond associations  – Micromeria Cunninghamii), with axillary infloresoence, calyx 5 parted, teeth long acute; stamens didynamous, free, exserted; style, single, bifid; capsule ?2-celled; flowers white in pairs, or single; whole plant including corolla much pilose. A peculiar thick-leaved Senecio. A curious little ?Eryngium. A fine Lycopodium bearing spikes of fructification on a long stalk. Several Graminea. A very distinct Hypericum. Several Polygonæ; one, a very peculiar leafless species. A new ?Pittosporum of curious habit. And some highly peculiar little plants, with which, though at present unknown to me, I am very much pleased. And another fine sp. of Brachyglottis, or Haxtonia, or some closely-allied genus. Another of Lagenophora, and others of other Compositæ. Nothing, however, in my whole collection gave me greater satisfaction than, first, the lovely Veronica catarractæ of Forster; (of which, I am happy to say, I have fine specimens for you), – this very graceful plant I only detected in one spot, and that a very appropriate one, growing profusely on the rooks an large stones of a shaded secluded waterfall  – and, second a fine plant of Forster’s little-known N.Z. genus, Pennantia – perhaps a 2nd species, as its anthers (in my male specimens) are oblong not “ovate.” Here, at this my new residence, I am away from my Books and Herbaria, and, therefore, cannot write so fully nor satisfactorily as I would have done. But I am very desirous of answering your kind letter without loss of time, and of transmitting you the enclosed specimens of my Filices Novæ for the purpose already stated. 
I have scarce had time yet to look into Dieffenbach, but from what little I have seen of it I believe it to be a compilation: but of this more anon. Whilst he was here (as, I think, I mentioned to your son) I came to the conclusion that he knew very little of Botany, and another gentleman (a good Geologist with whom I am well-acquainted) arrived at a similar illation in reference to the amount of his geological powers. Among other of his errors, he says, he travelled often enough through the “tawai woods” which tree is one of my n. sp. of Fagus? and of which I had given him a specimen, and set, with Cunningham’s Precursor in his hand, he calls this plant “Leiospermum racemosum”!! – vide, vol. I., pp. 27, 55. I perceive, in the list of N.Z. shells  – which has been drawn up by Mr. Gray for Dieffenbach’s vols. – 2 Helices (nos. 142 & 143) which were given by me, together with several other shells of my discovering, from my Cabinet to Mr. Busby on his leaving for England, now described by Gray as n. sp. of his, and as being brought, to England by different gentlemen therein named; whilst the real discoverer, who only got them through much painful and toilsome search  – and who generously gave them to different friends  – is not so much as once mentioned! My poor friend Cunningham, used feelingly to lament to me his own case  – in reference to many of his own plants, which had been kindly adopted in a similar manner: – Sic transit &c. !
Please tell my dear friend, Dr. Hooker, that I wrote him pr. H.M.S. “Tortoise”  – and have since (in Sept. last) received his most kind and interesting letter from the Falklands of Sept. /42  – and do intend to write to him again soon. I hope he is arrived safe, quite well, and working hard on the Botany of these S. latitudes. By the bye, my dear Sir William, did you ever receive a letter of mine, containing a few small specimens of Mosses, which I sent you in Sept. /41? I ask the question as, while you have acknowledged all my other letters, there has not been any mention made of this. 
In the extract from my letter to you of July 20/41, which you have honoured me in publishing, in the Lond. Journ. Bot., vol. I, p.298, I am made, I think, to utter 2 or 3 little errors. In p.300, end of 1st paragraph  – “and cannot pronounce whether it be merely a var. of D. cupressinum or a distinct species”  – I believe, “D. excelsum will be found in my letter instead of “D. cupressinum”. And, p.301, for “Taue” I think I have “Tane”; (vide, also, remarks on Tab. DXLVIII, Ic. Plant.) and p.303, “Dicksonia squamosa” should be (as I think I must have it) “D. squarrosa”. And the nom. indig. for Thuja Doniana is not “Kawaha”, (Lond. Journ. Bot., vol. I., 571), but “Kawaka”; and that for “Phyllocladus trichomanoides” is not “Taue haha” (Ic. Pl. remarks on. Tab. DXLIX), but Tanekaha: – pardon me this. – 
Although I have so very lately received your letters, I am already quite on the look-out for more, being anxious to hear of your having received my large Box, and of the safe arrival of the living plants. I hope, too, that you will have used that small cheque  – which, by the bye has long ago been carried to my account  – in purchasing those Books requested in my last. If you have not obtained a good work on Conchology for me, I would thank you, my dear Sir William, to order your Bookseller to send me “Sowerby’s Manual” 2nd ed. I have no work whatever on Monocotyledones, nor on Musci, nor Algæ, nor Lichenes, nor Funghi; to the Orchideæ, Musci and Algæ, especially, I wish, by-and-bye, to pay a little attention. 
I have not yet seen our good friend Sinclair, since his return to this country. I have, however, very recently written to him. He is now at the helm of affairs, being Colonial Secretary. I hope he will find his “berth” an easier one than his predecessor did  – but, I fear do what he may he will not be able to please the restless spirits of this generation! He will not find much good Botanizing ground in his locality and I apprehend his duties will scarce allow of his straying far. Fitzroy our new Governor, is now at Wellington. The times are very dull, but most people are indulging great hopes of future good. 


Tuesday, March 26, 1844. 

No vessel being about to leave by which I could forward my letter, I have kept it open until now, and am right glad that I did so, for by so doing, I have again to thank you for another kind Note of Sept. 27/43, pr. Mr. McCormick which has just come to hand, and which has given me great satisfaction  – as by it I learn, first that your dear Son has been returned to you alive and well, and second, that the Case of specimens “pr. Hamlet” arrived safe and in good condition. I cannot, however, add much more just now. I shall have plenty of Natural History specimens by and bye for the Linn. Society, when I have a little time to sort them out: and some more Bones for Owen. Be assured, my dear Sir, that all and every new specimen I can ever lay my hands on shall be yours. Allow me to request that you will be pleased to remember Mr. Heward, from the Duplicates & Triplicates soon to be forwarded. I suppose I shall be stationed ere long (by our Bishop) somewhere about the Southern Head of Hawkes Bay, and, if so, I shall have to cross and recross mountainous tracts (the Natives say snowy peaks) in visiting my large and extensive parish, when, I doubt not, I shall meet with somewhat new, and, then the name and kindness of Sir W. and Dr. Jos. Hooker can never be forgotten. I am only now anxious to hear of the living plants having also arrived in good health, of which, however, I have little doubt. I hope, too that some of the many seeds sown in the Boxes will have sprung up during the voyage. 
I am still on the look out for News  – our letters are becoming more and more valuable in my eyes; like the amor nummi the desire of possession increases daily – the more I have the more I seek to have. 
Please present my kindest respects to Lady Hooker, and my most affectionate regards to Dr. Jos. – but I must now endeavour to write him a few lines, as I have also a Note from him. 
And ever bear in mind, my dear Sir William, that I always shall consider your having an undoubted right to alter any name of any Plant which I may have attempted to name or describe in any of my parcels. The few specimens I collected in my last journey, shall be sure to go by first opportunity, after their arrival here from Hawkes Bay. I now expect them daily. 

Believe me,
My dear Sir William,
With Every Respect,

Ever most faithfully and affectionately Yours,
William Colenso. 

12 April 1844

Jos. D Hooker Esq., M. D.,
	&c  &c  &c
								St. John’s College, Waimate,
		New Zealand. April 12th, 1844. 
My dear friend. 
An English whaler having put into the Bay of Islands to recruit & refit for her passage homewards, offers me an opportunity of writing you – which I most gladly embrace. From my Book of Mems. I find, that I wrote you, pr. “Tortoise,” on the 17 of May/43 – since when I have recd. your very kind and most welcome epistle of Sept. 6/42, and, last week, your equally friendly note of Sept. 28/43, for all which my heart thanks you. I rejoice, my dear Hooker, in your safe return to the Land of your fathers – in your many preservations during your long and perilous voyages – in your success in Botanical & Geological Discovery – in your having to look over your old companion’s gatherings – and in the almost certainty of your Having to publish the Botany of the Southern hemisphere – in which I hope you will have made some progress ere this reaches you. I don’t know how the English Treasury stands affected in these peculiar times, but, should private subscriptions be necessary in order to enable you to do justice to the noble science, allow me to offer my mite of ₤21. 0. 0 – which is ready at first instruction. I am happy in hearing of your intention to adopt Banks’ & Forster’s names, where they can be ascertained. – If I send my late few discoveries by this vessel – which I shall do if those I left to be shipped at Hawke’s Bay arrive in time – I trust you will find somewhat new among them: and some of Forster’s little known plants, i.e. Veronica catarracta, Penantia corymbosa, &c. I wrote your father last month, and enclosed a scrap or two of some new ferns, which letter I hope he will safely have received. I thought on you much, during my late journey through the dense forests of the interior, especially when passing through ever-humid spots, abounding with the most luxurious profusion of Ferns, Mosses, & Jungermanniæ – where you would have gained 20 specimens, at least, for my one. I could scarce help at times invoking the shades of Forster, Banks, Solander, & Cunningham, – and very sure I am that the guardian Dryads heard your name of Kew breathed forth. I could not detect Gastrodia (unless an Orchis I have found should prove to be it – I have not the generic char. of Gastrod., so, not being gifted with supernatural powers, I of course could not determine – nor Monoclea; though in looking after this latter I have often met with what I consider to be a sp. of Marchantia, having a large horizontal thick green thallus but without fructifications. I have just commenced Dieffenbach’s (so called) work on N.Z. – and have scarce patience with the good German. Information he obtained from the writer to this, he details as his own – Cunningham’s Botanical remarks he has continual recourse to, even to his little errors – he states certain plants to grow in certain districts, which never existed there – and others he states to belong to genera never seen in N. Zealand – and others as new – which Cunningham’s Precursor, which he had in his hand, mentions (i.e. “Pukatea” p.75 vol. 1., “Laurelia N. Zealandiæ”,) – calls the Vitex littoralis a “pine” (p. 224, vol. 1.) – and asserts that the fine N.Z. pigeon feeds on the “leaves!” of “Kahikatoa” Leptospermum scoparium – and, worse still, on its small “seeds”!! (p. 80, vol. 1.) Then again, as to his knowledge of the Native Language – ha, ha, ha, – that is seen throughout the work, in numberless instances – and, fortunately enough, proves to others (what we here know) that he did not write the Grammar or the Vocabulary at the end of the work, which as well as the Songs, Prayers and translations of them, were all supplied. But, jam satis – enough of Dieffenbach: let me beg of you not to adduce him as an authority for any thing respecting the N. History of N. Zealand – especially its botany – unless you have good reason to believe him to be correct – this by the way. I have not yet gone regularly through his compilation. I hope the living plants dispatched pr. “Tortoise” are flourishing in Kew Gardens – and I trust you have acknowledged and welcomed the Ferns (though few) as old acquaintances. You will have heard of my present residence – but, before this reaches you, I shall, I suppose, be on the desolate & dreary E. Coast, nr. the S. Head of Hawke’s Bay. If stationed there – which I have every reason to believe will be the case – I hope to do something more toward enriching your Herbaria and Royal Gardens: I shall have a large parish to perambulate, and now & then the high Ruahine range of Mountains to cross in order to see my flock. Do not think for a moment that I can forget you – No; I know you will not think so. I am now occupied – entirely so – with Greek and Latin, &c., which I shall not regret to lay aside. The Bay of Islands is, (to me) much altered since you left – your (our) old friends gone – Mr. Mair now residing at Wangarei – my garden, having fallen into other hands, is a complete wilderness, & trampled on by Cows! Sic transit, &c.!! Our old friend Sinclair is at the helm of affairs – Colon. Secretary! I fear his Berth will not be a very comfortable one – unless he unites the distinguishing qualities of Proteus and Crœsus, and that, too, pro bono publico. Our Bishop has lately returned from a long journey in the middle of Stewart’s Island – would that I had been sent on that tour – the Natives, who went with him, speak of the “different trees of those parts, with large leaves;” – of which I hope one day to know something. And now my dear Hooker I must conclude this rambling epistle: remember me most kindly to your father, and believe me
Ever most truly yours						W. Colenso. 

If the plants arrive in time I shall endeavour to write yr. father by this vessel. 
Address, as before, – care of Rev. R. Burrows
			Kororareka		Bay of Islands

I am sorry indeed to have to add, that I shall not be able now (under the change in my occupation & place of residence) to attend to the getting up & sending off Mr. McLeay’s plants. 
Whenever I write a long Botanl. Letter (in my way!) to your father – you must always consider that it is in fact to you. You know (I am sorry to remember) how my time used to be fully occupied – and it is not less so now. 
 # 
 
20 May 1844
St. John’s College, Waimate,
New Zealand, May 20, 1844. 
Sir W. J. Hooker, K. G.,
&c. &c. &c. 
Kew. 

My dear Sir William,
If you have received my letter of March 7 and 26, you will have been on the look-out for the specimens therein referred to, and which accompany this. Two days ago, only, my excellent friend Mr. James Busby, (late British Resident in this land) informed me of his being on the eve of departing from the Bay of Islands for England, via America, and that he would gladly take charge of anything I might have to send – fortunately I have been employing all my spare time of late in making up the few specimens I had for you, or I should have assuredly lost this good opportunity, as he sails in 2 days. – to his kind care I commend one case of dried specimens, &c. and one small Tin Cannister, containing a few specimens, &c. in spirits, which would not go in to the Case; the whole of which I trust you will safely receive. Of Mr. Busby (the friend of A. Cunningham) you will, I think, have heard from Dr. Jos. your son; and, therefore, I scarce need add, that any kindness you can shew him, in this his visit to England, will be appreciated by me as if done to myself. If your N. Zealand plants pr. “Tortoise” arrived safe, and are living, pray shew them to him. I have for some time past been looking out for a letter from you, but have yet to be so gratified. Among the plants sent are a few from the Alpine and snowy summit of Mount Hikurangi, near the E. Cape, which I would were better: I could not go thither myself, so sent an intelligent Native, who, after several days absence, brought those now sent, and 2 birds, just enough to make one sigh for more; and the dearest lot I ever obtained, costing me nearly £4! – I still live in hopes of one day visiting that Mountain. I have, also, enclosed in the boxes, specimens of two species of Hakea, from our gardens here, originally had from N. S.W. – as they differ from those noticed by you in the Lond. Journ. of Bot., I thought they might prove new, or acceptable, which must be my excuse for sending them. In the boxes, Nos. IV. and VI. in the Cabin of Living Plants, pr “Tortoise” were some plants, which, in my list, I called, Ackama rosæfolia, and which I have little doubt is an error, they should have been termed, Friesia racemosa. – I have, also, enclosed, a lot of Moa Bones, for Professor Owen, with my respects; and hope to send him some more at a future opportunity; for if I be stationed by our Bishop at Hawkes Bay I shall then be able to obtain several such specimens with little extra exertion: – please tell him that the 2 Bones from Waikare Lake, had been for a long time exposed, and are therefore brittle and much broken. You will also find a few little things for the Linnæan Society, which, my dear Sir William you will please do me the favor of presenting them in my name: – one phial, containing a small fish and 2 worms from the interior; one ditto of Insects from the E. Cape and thence to Poverty Bay; one Weka (Rallus – ,) from Mount Hikurangi, and a pair of legs of a second specimen, which unfortunately was devoured by the rats; one Korora, (Aptenodytes minor) from the Bay of Islands; and an imperfect specimen of the Huia (Neophora –) from Castle point: this latter bird I hope to send good specimens of, with every particular, by and bye; the only one now sent is prepared so as to be worn in the hair of a Chief of rank, and is to the Natives of these parts of great value. The Natives say the long-billed bird is the Cock, and not the hen as Dieffenbach has it, nor is the Bird in any part of the land called “Uia”, but Huia: – I have waded through a little of Dieffenbach’s compilation, and the more I read the more I am disgusted at it. I need not make any remark to you about its Botany – for, if you have read the remarks thereon, you will have made your own conclusions thereupon. – I had a letter from our friend, Dr. Sinclair, the other day, in which he says, “My present occupation may interrupt but will not put a stop to my delightful occupations in the woods or by the winding shore”. He was very well when I last heard from him. Edgerley, who now resides at Auckland, wrote me the other day, saying, he had found a new small Asplenium near the Volcanic hills in that neighbourhood; but which, I deem to be A. oblongifolium sent by me to you in a former parcel. 
With kind regards to Lady Hooker, and most affectionate remembrances to Dr. Jos. – (whom I cannot, I fear, write at this time)
Believe me, my dear Sir William,
Very sincerely and faithfully yours,
William Colenso. 


List of Descriptions
	of Plants sent in Box;
      with a few Remarks on the
	same, by
		W. Colenso
Waimate,
   N. Zealand,
      July 30/44

1. a small Wahlenbergia, from dry exposed situations, top of a high hill near the sea, at Mataikona, a village on the E. Coast, in 41o S. lat. – (See No. 58, in lot sent in July, 1841.) n. sp.??         
2. a small Composit., from same locality as preceding – only one specimen found here; two others, however, afterwards; vide, No. 91. 
3. a small Galium, same locality as preceding. 
4. a fine Cardamine, from sides of a stream near Wahanga, a river on the E. Coast, 20 miles N. of Mataikona. 
5. Specimens of an elegant Composit. shrub, 2-4 feet high, stems erect and many and not much branched; low wet grounds nr. Mataikona. 
6. Specimens of a pretty ?Gnaphalium, from same locality as No. 1, could not find any in flower. 
7. Epilobium, small and much-leaved, from ditto. 
8. Small Juncaceous plant from Mataikona; near the shore. 
9. Fine Lagenophora (n. sp.,) from same locality as No. 1, – halfway up the hill – scarce. 
10. Specimen from an Herbaceous ?Chenopodium-like plant, from near Mataikona. Plant 2-3 feet high; somewhat branched. 
11. Luzula, from ditto. 
12. ?Eryngium, from ditto; nr. sea-shore; not in flower. Smell and taste of the common Eryngium – on the Cornish shores. 
13. A small Graminea, 10-12 inches high, growing in tufts, with preceding. 
14. Specimens of a thick-leaved prostrate Senecio, from stony places and cliffs by the sea. Plant sometimes found much branched, procumbent, & spreading. 
15. Gnaphalium, apparently differing from the other N.Z. species, from Mataikona. 
16. A Curious plant (?Chara) from a deep stream, 2 miles inland from Mataikona; found growing a foot under water. It has a most stinking smell when fresh, resembling bruised garlic, or assafœtida, – only much stronger – if a n. sp. it well deserves the name of fœtidissima. There are, also, a few shells with it. 
17. Curious variety of Asplenium lucidum, only one frond of a large plant was thus formed, the others as usual; from same locality as previous. 
18. Mniarum, from same locality as No. 1. 
19. Small Pimelia, ditto. 
20. Small Grass, foot of hill, Mataikona. 
21. Veronica catarractæ; plenty of fine specimens of this elegant plant, found growing on some moss-grown rocks, in the river Moeangiangi, (Hawke’s Bay,) 10 miles inland from the sea: plant 1-2 feet, procumbent. Only detected in this one spot. 
22. Another Elegant plant, Arthropodium ––––––––; from a craggy spot near the summit of a high hill, 6 miles S.E. of Moeangiangi: – (vide No. 18, in large lot, Decr. /42.)
23. Gnaphalium, from same locality, and growing with, No. 21. 
24. A Viola, (apparently an aged plant,) from ditto. 
25. A lovely specimen (and only one) of a ?Myosotis from ditto. 
26. A shrub (?Cassinia,) 3-5 feet, sandy spots, E. Coast nr. Mataikona. Growing close to the sea. 
27. From marshy places, (and also in dry sandy spots,) near Porangahau on the E. Coast; – (vide specimens, No. 47, in lot, Decr. /42)
28. Small Juncus, from ditto. 
29. I do not know what these are, but I think they are flowers of No. 14, which when first detected was scarcely in flower. 
30. A fine new Hypericum, from grassy spots, Mataikona and Porangahau; grows very erect. 
31. Small Juncus, same locality as 27. 
32. Small Ranunculus, from ditto. 
33. Small Carex, from ditto. 
34. Fine specimens of a plant formerly sent, (vide, 76, lot, July/41), Drymaria sp. from near Porangahau. 
35. Pimelia, from ditto. 
36. Peculiar little plant, growing in dense tufts, in dry barren soil near Waimarama, 15 miles S. of the S. Head of Hawke’s Bay. 
37. A Lobelia, with a thick mid-rib colored pink, from same locality as 27. (vide, also, specs., No. 28, in lot, Decr. /42; and No. 73, in lot, sent, July/41.)
38. A peculiar little plant, from dry barren shingly plains, near the Tukituki river, Hawke’s Bay. 
39. A Pterostylis from same locality as 27, & 37. 
40. Pretty little pink-flowered plant, detected growing on the sea coast near Porangahau: this appears to be quite new to N.Z., & I hope you will be able to raise it from seed now sent. 
41. (no note)
42. Large Pimelia, branching semi-procumbent shrub, from same locality as No. 26. – (Perhaps, P. arenaria, of R. Cunn.) 
43. Scrap of an elegant little ?Hydrocotyle, of which one specimen only was met with – near Porangahau. 
44. Larger var. (or distinct species,) of No. 40, from the dry and barren shingly beach at Ahuriri, in Hawke’s Bay, – a large plant, prostrate. 
45. A scrap of a Myrtaceous (or Myrsinaceous) shrub, 6-8 feet high, not yet detected in flower: – woods, near Mataikona. 
46. An Epilobium, from a damp spot, on the top of a hill at Oropauanui, in Hawke’s Bay – (see, No. 20, & No. 20β, in lot, Dec. /42)
47. An elegant Hydrocotyle, detected growing thickly & erect, in a damp gulley near the sea, road from Mataikona to Akitio; not seen afterwards. 
48. A small Carex, only one imperfect specn. preserved – culm 16-25 inches, near Porangahau. 
49. A curious Polygonum, almost leafless, growing horizontally on the dry barren shingly beach at Ahuriri: – at first sight this plant (when not in flower) appears like Rushes strewed upon the ground. 
50. A ditto   ditto, with elegant leaves, found in plenty with preceding; its habit, however, is different, as it rises and forms bushes, 1-2 feet high. 
  50β. A memento of a handsome (n. sp. of.) Carmichælia, from the banks of the river at Mohaka, Hawke’s Bay; – it was not in a good state for gathering specimens from, and I hoped to find it again but was disappointed. It grew at Mohaka very profusely, 6-9 feet high, of less rigid growth than the common species; it flowers, too, much later, the other sp. having done flowering when I gathered this. 
  51β. A specimen, gathered for its beauty, of a splendid sp. of Leptospermum; a fine tree of 25-30 feet, much branched; found on the hills near Mohaka. 
  52β. Specimen of a Tree found on the hills in dry woods near Mohaka; plant 15-18 feet high, of common-place appearance (vide, 68, to which it is, I think, nearly allied). 
  53β. A small Polygonum, from the inundated muddy banks of the Mohaka river where it grows cæspitosely among the stones (compare, with No. 146, lot, Decr. /42). 
  54β. A Passiflora, from Mohaka, woods on banks of the R. (perhaps, P. tetrandra). 
  55β. A small procumbent plant from the sandy flats near the large lagoon, at the mouth of the R. Wairoa, Hawke’s Bay. (Perhaps, a Myriogyne). 
  56β. Two flowers of a plant, sent in lot, Decr. /42, No. 86; gathered for their beauty; from near Porangahau. 
  57β. A sarmentose plant, from the side of the River Awanui, near Te Kawakawa, E. Cape; – (see, No. 162, in lot, Decr. /42). I afterwards detected this plant in Te Waimana District, near Wakatane in the Bay of Plenty. 
  58β. A Carex, from near Poverty Bay. 
  59β. A Glaucous Carex, found growing in beds nr. the sea, & on the sand a little above high-water mark; E. Coast nr. Poverty Bay: – Native name, Wawa. 
  60β. A Pimelia, from the Coast near Turanga. 
  61β. Ditto	Ditto	Ditto. 
  62β. Two leaves! of a Plantago (not in fl.,) I supposed to be P. varia. 
  63β. An Epilobium, from Turanga, sandy, grassy spots, nr. the sea side. 
  64β. One small scrap of a small species of the same genus; – perhaps E. nummularifolium, or E. pedunculosa, of A.C.; – common in sandy grounds, creeping. 
  65β. Scrap of a small Composit. from Turanga; ?same as No. 2, in lot, Decr. /42. 
  66β. Specimen of a Linum from Mataikona; of different habit and appearabnce from L. monogynum, Forst., – a fine erect, shrubby plant, 3-4 feet high, bearing a profusion of flowers in Nov. & Dec.; grows common in grassy spots among fern, and on the banks of Rivers, flowers & leaves larger, than in Forster’s plant; Native name Rauhuia. 
  67β. Peculiar stout- and branching-culmed Grass; from the banks of a river, behind the village of Porangahau. 
  68β. Grass, from the sea-shore, between Mataikona & Akitio. 
  69β. A beautiful large perennial grass found growing plentifully in low graounds, near the sea, at Mataikona: plant very erect. 
51. Handsome Pimelia, elegant shrub, 4-6 feet, from top of Panekire, a high and precipitous hill overhanging Waikare Lake. Perhaps identical with No. 24, in lot sent Decemr. 1842. Largest species. 
52. A Cardamine, from exposed situations, shores of Waikare Lake. This plant grows in dry ground, in large tufts. The spec. sent is a small tuft. – I think the N.Z. Cardamine require close investigation. 
53. A Grass, of a very beautiful green, shores of the Lake. 
54. An Euphrasia, from Panekire; small shrubby plant, 10-12 inches; not in flower; from leaf and capsule (old) apparently differing from the sea coast species – E. cuneata. 
55. Specimens of an unknown shrub (or small tree) from Panekire, 10-14 feet high, much branched; flowers not yet expanded, with old fruit still adhering: young leaves somewhat gummy, stuck to paper in drying. 
56. Moss, Panekire. 
57.  ditto,  ditto; no fruit; grows very thick on the ground, the foot is completely buried in it in walking. 
58. Pterostylis, from Panekire; perianth large and colored, apparently differing from P. Banksii, the perianth of which is green: only 3 specimens obtained. 
59. Thick-leaved Araliaceous Tree from Panekire; (specimens in fruit, No. 125, in lot Decemr. /42,) grows stuntedly in exposed spots on the hill, hence smaller leaves. 
60. Coprosma, (?n. sp.) handsome shrub, 2-5 feet, Panekire; branches flat spread out brachiate. 
61. Peculiar elegant Lycopodium, terrestrial, open spots, summit of Panekire. 
62. Microtis, n. sp., – with former. (see, 102)
63. Large-leaved Lycopodium from Panekire, scarce; no fructifn. – (perhaps same as No. 215, in lt, Decemr. /42). 
64. ?Pittosporum, from Huiarau, a high hill in the interior beyond Waikare Lake: shrub, or small tree, rigid, divaricate, 6-7 feet; flowers, single, few, terminal, only saw 3 plants, – only 1 specimen with fruit, which I send. The branches of the shrub are exceedingly tough. 
65. A curious Polygonum, from dry shingly banks of River Wakatane, near Ruatoki: only one specn. detected. The Natives, however, informed me that it was common in that locality. 
66. Small Chenopodium-like plant, from sandy ground, Pupuaruhe and Ruaatoki, banks of River Wakatane. Plentiful in kumara plantations. 
67. This Tree, which for many years, I have sought assiduously, is, apparently a species of Forster’s N.Z. Genus, Pennantia. It is diœcious, & hitherto I have only been fortunate enough to detect flowering specimens of the male plant, which possess the following characters. Petals, none; Sepals, 5, oblong-lanceolate, 3-nerved, acute, revolute; Stamens, 5, filaments, tortuous, twice the length of the sepals, and alternate with them; anthers oblong, adnate, exserted, large, and somewhat incumbent. (But why mention all this, when I send you the specimens?) The flowers, which are small, numerous, & white within, but ochre-coloured externally, are produced in short, dense panicles, terminal at the ends of the branches. Hence this plant has a very pleasing appearance, in the season of flowering, among the larger trees of the forest, from its graceful corna of profuse white inflorescences. A small Tree, 14-20 feet high; in dense forests in the high hilly range in the Ruatahuna and Wakatane Districts in the interior. Detected flowering, in January, 1844. The fruit is said by the Natives to be small and black, resembling those of Privet, (Ligustrum vulgare,) and to be greedily devoured by birds. The principal use for which this celebrated tree was in such high requisition by the New Zealanders (before the introduction of Tinder Boxes and Lucifer Matches) was, the all-important one of procuring fire, its wood bearing a pre-eminence over all the other for this quality. This was done by simply rubbing two of its dried branches together, when, through the friction thus occasioned, fire was easily obtained. Fire was, also, procured, in the same manner, by the N. Zealanders, from branches of Laurus tawa and L. taraire, or Melicytus ramiflorus, Aralia schefflera, Coriaria sarmentosa, Corynocarpus lævigata, Geniostoma ligustifolium, &c., &c, but labour is much greater and often in vain; as the fire, when it is produced, does not (to use their expression) “stand up”. Hearing so much of the high qualities of this greatly-praised Tree, (for the Natives relate some marvellous tales concerning it,) I was induced to seek for it, so long back as 1835, but could never succeed in finding a single plant. I hoped, however, in 1840, that my desires were about to be realized, as I then heard from some Natives (to whom I had offered a reward for finding this Tree,) that they had discovered it growing among the high hills a few miles S.E. of Wangarei Bay; I accordingly sent a Native to bring me two branches of it, for which I (returning by the village in which he resided,) would call the next day; I did so, and, to my mortification and great disappointment, was presented with two branches stripped of their leaves and buds! Nor was this all, for I found on enquiry, that in order to save himself the labour of climbing the tree, he had felled it with his axe, – so that I had now no better prospect than before of ever seeing it. At this season, too (November,) it was neither in flower nor fruit. I can only account for its great scarcity, from its having been formerly in common request, and constantly cut down to supply the use for which it was so greatly in demand. I have not yet seen the female plant, but hope to obtain specimens at no very distant period. The N. Zealand name for this plant, in the Southern and Middle Districts of the Island, is, Kahi komako, while in the Northern parts they drop the “h,” and term it, Kai komako. Forster found his plant, P. corymbosa, (on which he founded the genus,) in the Middle Island, with the gen. char. of which this agrees pretty well – as far as the same is by him expressed – excepting that the anthers are oblong instead of  “ovate.”
68. Specimens of a long-leaved Brachyglottis or Haxtonia, from dry woods near Ruatahuna: small tree, 20-25 feet, bark deciduous. 
69. Fragments of a Myrsine, (probably M. divaricata,) – a shrub of stunted growth, Huiarau. 
70. Coprosma, small shrub, 3-5 feet, same locality as preceding. 
71. Fine ?Moss (same as No. 121 in lot, Decemr. /42,) from same locality as preceding: sought diligently but could not detect any bearg. fruit. 
72. Epilobium, growing in large tufts, (with No. 52) Waikare Lake. 
73. Memento of a Phyllocladus from Huiarau, (first observed in 1838,) probably a n. sp., fruit & flowers still unknown. 
74. Pilose-leaved Metrosideros, hanging pendant from trees, Huiarau; flowers and fruit not detected. 
75. A morsel of a linear-leaved Coprosma, leaves obtuse & truncate, a small shrub, 2-3 feet, bearing leaves scattered in sub-fascicles here & there on its branches: from Huiarau. Lost all my other specs. of it. 
76. Fruit of Taẁero, (nom in vulg. dict.) vide. No. 131, in lot Decr. /42. 
77. Specimen of a shrub growing in the cliffy heights of Maunga Powhatu, in the interior. This plant, when fresh, has a most powerful odour of Musk, for which quality it is highly prized by the Natives; unfortunately it was not in flower, when discovered in Jany. /44, but, from the Native account, (who state it to bear seeds resembling those of the thistle,) I suppose it to belong to the Composit. order. I scarce need add, I much wish to get it. 
78. Asplenium, n. sp., – (I copy a memorandum concerning this little fern, sent you in a letter, in March last:) – “This pretty little sp. of Asplenium, (the smallest yet discovered in N. Zealand,) was detected growing in the secluded and shaded dells at Te Hinau, on the E. bank of the Ẁirinaki River, in Te Ẁaiiti District, in the interior of the N. Island of N. Zealand. This plant, at first sight, may be easily taken for a small var. of Asp. Hookm., with which sp. it has evidently very close affinity, but from which, its smaller and seldom more than pinnate fronds abundantly distinguishes it. Its habitat too, (being found growing among Lomaria procera and other large species of that genus, in a spot favoured for promoting the more luxuriant growth of the several genera of the Filical Group,) precludes its being considered as a starved specimen; while, on the other hand, its old stipes, almost coalescent at the base and forming a kind of Rhizoma, sufficiently shew it to be anything but a young plant of that species.”
79. Curious little plant, of densely cæspitose growth, found on the sandy tongue of land between the junction of the Ẁirinaki and Rangitaiki rivers in Te Ẁaiiti District. 
80. Coprosma, – a shrub 5-7 feet, woods, Huiarau & Ruatahuna. 
81. Small Juncus-like plant, from banks of Wakatane river; – common in inundated places: cæspitose. 
82. Portion of a small leaf of a splendid arborescent monocotyledonous Plant, from the forests on the mountains: native name, Tikapu. I have long sought the fruit & flower of this fine plant, but as yet in vain. 
83. Fine Moss, dark ravines, wet spots, humid woods, Ruatahuna. 
84. Orchis, same as No. 262, lot, Decr. /42; vide, also, 103 in spirits. 
85. ?Uncinia, apparently a finer (i.e. more slender) sp. than U. australis; damp spots, shaded woods, Ruatahuna. 
86. ?Uzula, larger var. than any I have yet seen; woods, Ruatahuna. 
87. Coprosma, slender brachiate shrub, 5-7 feet; ditto	ditto. 
88. Aspidium from a bog near Pupuaruhe, (Wakatane River,) E. Coast; I have sought this Fern for many years, having (in 1837) detected a solitary plant growing at Horotutu in the Bay of Islands, from which one plant (often visited!) I sent poor specimens to Cunningham, and, I think, to yourself. From its venules not anastomosing, &c, I suppose this plant, under the new nomenclature of J. Sm., (if such be adopted,) will range under Lastrea. I have often thought it to be Asp. serra. of Sw., although I have never seen any other description of that fern, than the short one in Linnè. It certainly differs somewhat in habit, and more in its very brittle stipes, from the N.Z. Aspideæ; – A. Cunninghamiarum, (Nob.,) and, perhaps, A. pennigerum, (although I doubt this sp. to belong to Aspidm. never having detected its involucrum,) alone excepted, which species have stipes somewhat similar. 
89. Small Rumex from Waikato River; ?same as No. 116, in lot. Decemr. /42. 
90. A little plant from the side of Waiau (Hawke’s Bay) river, under the village of Hinemokai, growing on the mud close to water’s edge; (similar ? to No. 59, in lot, June 1843, from the stony bed of a stream, road to Waimate;) petals of this one lilac-coloured. 
91. Little Compositæ, detected growing among fern at Te Matai, near Waikare Lake; only 2 specimens obtained there, and one spec. from a high hill near Mataikona, E. Coast, 2 degress further S. 
92. Elegant shrub of Labiata, 4-5 feet, on the mud bank of the Wairoa River, (near the junction of the Waiau,) – shrub very diffuse, only one plant seen. 
93. Small Gramineæ, from Pakura, dense forests near Ruatahuna. 
94. Viola, shores of Waikare Lake, close to water’s edge. 
95. Same as No. 67, but from a different locality: forests near Tututarata, Te Ẁaiiti District. 
96. Jungermannia, epiphytical on Fern Trees, (Cyathea dealbata,) woods near Waikato River; probably J. phyllanthus. 
97. Elegant Hydrocotyle, damp woods, interior. 
98. Urtica, from woods, Ruatahuna; remarkable for its large, jointed, glass-like spines, (glands,) dreaded by Natives. 
99. Scrap of a Grass from Te Matata, E. Coast, believed to be imported. 
100. 2 Vermes from a fresh water stream, Ruatahuna: and a small fish (?Cyclopterus sp.,) from Mataikona, E. Coast. I had 3 of these curious little fishes, procured from the pools in the rocks on the recession of the tide, but only succeeded in preserving one specimen. They stuck so fast to the rocks, or stones, as to be with difficulty separated: I have seen a second species, somewhat resembling this. The Natives call them , Panoko.
101. One of my prizes – and what I take to be an Orchis. This plant, although I have sought after for several years, offering rewards for it, but in vain until this journey. It is leafless, 1-2 feet high, and found in alluvial ground, banks of rivers and shaded woods. It has a profusion of tuberous roots, of all sizes (some 18 inches long,) beneath the soil, which were always greedily sought after by the Natives, being quite a prize to them before the introduction of potatoes – hence, I conclude, its scarcity. I have planted several roots, which I hope will grow. A portion of the root is in the bottle of spirits. Native name Perei; flowering in Decr. and January. From Te Hinau, River Ẁirinaki, and banks of the Wakatane River, Interior, N. Island. I believe I sent you an incipient stalk of this plant in my first parcel. 
102. Orchis, vide, 62, from Panekire, n. sp. 
103. Ditto, vide 84; and No. 262, in lot, Decr. /42. 
104. Trichomanes, n. sp., – (I copy a mem. concerning this little fern sent you in a Letter in March last.):  – “This very elegant sp. of Trichomanes was discovered on the steep sides of a dark ravine on the banks of a small rivulet which meandered through the dense and ever humid forests of the mountainous region between Waikare Lake and Ruatahuna in the Interior of the N. Island of N. Zealand, where it grew very profusely. A sp. having evident affinity with both T. venosum and T. leptophyllum; this latter species, however, I have never seen.”
105. Scraps of Potamogeton, from a rivulet in Te Waiiti District. 
106. Ditto of a stunted Dracophyllum, barren plains, with above. 
107. Leptospermum, small shrub 4-6 feet, from Mataikona, long calycine leaves remaining on after corolla has expanded. 
108. Boraginæ – an sp. distinctæ?
109. Scrap of a Coprosma, large shrub, 6-9 feet, Huiarau. 
110. Ditto of a Myriophyllum, from watercourse, Mangatawiri near the Waikato River. 
111. Ditto of a large many-headed Juncus; same locality as preceding. 
112. Large Myriophyllum from watercourse near Matamata in the interior; perhaps the same as No. 238, in lot, Decr. /42. 
113. ?Uredo sp., curious, parasitical on perianth of Polygonum prostratum, from sides of Mangatawiri rivulet, near Waikato River. 
114. Magnificent ?Microtis – all specimens past flowering – from a bog between Pupuaruhe and Te Kupenga villages Bay of Plenty. I hope you will be able to make it out – it may be identical with Nos. 62 & 102, or it may be a n. sp.; some specimens were near 3 feet in length. I have secured some roots, which I have planted in my garden. 
115. Large green ?Confervæ from the bed of Wakatane River: – we crossed this river in the course of 4 days march upwards of 100 times, and at every crossing had to exercise great caution, in consequence of the quantities of this plant which everywhere flourished, even in the deepest and most outrageous parts of the stream. 
116. Fine Polytrichum, from a clay bank in a cleared wood, road between Tauaki and Oẁiorangi, in the interior near Maunga Powhatu. 
117. Polytrichum, with curiously-shaped capsule, dry sandy banks in wet shaded woods, Huiarau. 
118. Moss from trees, Huiarau. 
119. ditto	   ditto	ditto. 
120. ditto   ditto	ditto. 
121. ditto	   damp shaded spots ditto. 
122. Polytrichum	ditto	ditto. 
123. Fragment of a Moss,	ditto. 
124. Splendid Moss, wet dark ravines, forests, Huiarau; to be seen in perfection must be viewed alive and fresh. 
125. Small fragment of a Moss, Huairau. 
126. Handsome Moss from under ?Fagus Trees, top of Panekire. 
127. Moss from Te Hinau, banks of R. Ẁirinaki. 
128. Moss from Banks of Wakatane River. 
129. Ditto. 
130. Curious little plant, Composit., from the barren shingly beach, Ahuriri, Hawke’s Bay. 
131. Wooly Moss, from Waikare Lake; same as No. 139, in lot, Decemr. /42, and like that without fructifn. 
132. Polytrichum, Waikare Lake. 
133. Moss,	ditto	ditto. 
134. Black Fungi, from a living Tree, in a wood nr. Mohaka, Hawke’s Bay. 
135. Grass, growing in large dark-green tufts, in a sandy dell, near the junction of the Waiau and Wairoa rivers. 
136.)
137.)  Mosses from Scoriæ, near
138.)  Manukau Bay, W. Coast. 
139.)
140. Grass, from Waikare Lake. 
141.)   Juncus-like plants
142.)   from Mangatawiri. 
143.)   Hymenophylla, woods 
144.)   near Waikare Lake
145. Scrap of Cyathea medullaris (?var.) from the interior. 
146. Scrap of a Gleichenia, from Otukupeka in Te Ẁaiiti District; plant 18 inches high, with 4 dichotomous branches, sori not in 3’s and 4’s, margin revolute, plant cobwebby: the frond I secured I merely took for to look at by the way, as I intended to return to the village I left by the same path, but was necessitated to take another route. I just add an outline of the disposition of its branches, from a sketch taken on the spot. 
147. Half of a frond of a Gliechenia, from a wood near Papakura, at the head of Manakau Bay; plant 24-30 inches high, with 8 dichotomous branches, sori generally in 4’s, segments larger and broader than in preceding. 
148. Cyathea formosa, n. sp., Mss., incd. – (I add a copy of memm. as sent you in a Letter last month): – “Arborescent; caudex 12-15 feet, rough, being studded with broken and decaying petioles; frond, oblong-ovate, 6-9 feet, sub-tripinnate; pinnules, oblong, acuminate, acute, sub-opposite and attenuate; petiole, densely tomentose & channelled on upper surface; stipe, short. The fronds of this fern are soft and deciduous and when dry hang down around its caudex, (similar to those of Dicksonia fibrosa,) its stipes are very light, and somewhat aculeated towards base. This very beautiful arborescent fern, was detected growing in the dense forests of the mountainous region of Maunga Powhatu, a district lying in long. 177o 30’ E., and lat. 38o. 20’ S., in January 1844. The Natives call it, Punui, and use its fine green fronds on their setting places in their villages, when they assemble together on extraordinary occasions.”
149. Supposed n. sp. of Dicksonia. Arborescent, same locality with preceding (frond brought me by a Native,) not having my Books, Mss., nor Herbaria at hand, cannot speak positively: compare it closely with former specimens sent, especially D. fibrosa. 
150. Alseuosmia, small shrub, dry woods near Wanganui. 
151. ditto			ditto		ditto
152. ditto			ditto		ditto
153. Small Cardamine from Wairua near Wangarei. 
154. Grammatis caudata, n. sp., Mss. incd., from trunks of living trees, woods near Matamata; – I had often met with this plant in the woods but without fructification, and generally considered it as a var. of Polypodium grammatidis; but I have now considered it (though with some degree of doubt) as distinct from that plant, and worthy of being classed as Grammatis – although it is but intermediate. – I think, however, I must have sent it to you before, and I dare say you have done something with it ere this. 
155. I am at length able to send you specimens of this magnificent Viscum, year after year I have sought flowers or fruit on this truly fine plant but without success. It grows large, (as the specimens of its wood sent will abundantly testify,) and some of its glossy dark green leaves are very fine. This sp. is from the river Wairua, between Wangarei & Kaipara; the wood, however, is from Ngunguru, E. Coast: a large diffuse plant, parasitical on several trees, and rather common in shaded woods. The largest one I ever saw was overhanging Waikare Lake. The Natives call it, Puka. 
156. Specimens of a shrubby Herbaceous plant of Composit., (same as No. 342, in lot, Decemr. /42,) detected growing here at the Waimate. 
157. Leptospermum, ?n. sp., from sand hills, entrance of Kaipara Harbour, W. Coast, –  shrub, or small tree, 5-10 feet; calycine teeth very large & colored; pilose, &c. –
158. Compositaceous shrub, 7-10 feet, very much branched from bottom upwards, from muddy banks of rivers near the sea. I think I must have sent you this before. Native name, Makaka. 
159. Veronica speciosa. from sandhills, mouth of the Hokianga river, W. Coast. 
160. Lagenophora, n. sp., from banks of Wakatane river, near the village of Nga Mahanga. 
161.)   Juncaceous,
162.)   shores of Waikare Lake. 
163. Jungermannia, without fruit. 
164. Minute plant having the habit and appearance of Limosella, from mud flats on the low banks of the Wakatane River, just below the village of Nga Mahanga. 
165. Galium, from wood, road from Maru-te-angi to Maunga Powhatu. 
166. Jungermannia ?Hymenophyllum. 
167. Juncaceous plant of cæspitose growth, from banks of Wakatane River. 
168. Jungermannia, small & curious, from boggy ground near Wangarei. 
169. Moss, from low damp spots shaded woods, near Tohora, E. Coast. 
170. Moss. 
171. Woody Fungus, from dead trees, woods, Wangarei. 
172. Moss, from living Trees, dry woods, Wangarei. 
173. Jungermannia,	   ditto	ditto	ditto. 
174. Small Fungi, damp woods, ––––– ditto
175. Specimen of bark of Dammara australis, with new Resin on it, taken from Tree by W.C. The bark being deciduous falls off in scales, like this specimen, only some are much larger, sometimes 6 or 8 inches square, or more. 
176. Jungermannia on Bark of Dammara, from living tree, high hills, forests, near Wairua. 
177. Scraps of Musci & Jungermanniæ, from a wood at Waipuakakahu, half-way between Wangarei and Bay of Islands: – overland route. 
178. Jungermannia from ditto. 
179. Specimen of a monocotyledon, found growing in water, deep boggy spots, neighbourhood Bay of Islands; flowering in March: – native name Mǎrié. (I think I must have sent you this before). 
180. Specimen of an Araliaceous shrub, rather common about the Bay of Islands – and in dry woods on the E. Coast. I think it is described in Cunningham’s “Precursor” – which I have not by me. A shrub 8-12 feet, very much branched; flowering in Feb & March. 
181. From a bog near Waimate – same, perhaps, as No. 42, in lot, sent, Dec. /42. 
182. Specimen of a Leptospermum from the road between Waimate and the Bay of Islands: apparently differing from L. ericoides, in possessing larger capsules; shrubby tree, 8-9 feet. 
[Leptospermum ericoides]. 
183. Small Juncaceous plant, from boggy ground, road betn. Waimate and the Bay. 
184. Grass, common in wet places, growing in large tufts. 
185. This plant I have only noticed growing in the red volcanic soil between this place and the Bay of Islands, where I have met with it in profusion. I believe I sent you specimens before, but not good ones. I think A. Cunn. mentions it. 
186. A Schizæa from the country between the Head of Manukau Bay on the W. Coast, and the Thames. I hope this will prove new. Only 3 specimens found. 
187. Polygonum; common, in many parts of N. Zealand. A creeping plant, ascending to the tops of small trees & bushes, & completely covering them: flowering in Feb., & March. 
[V. salicifolia]. 
188. Young unexpanded flowers of Hartighsea spectabilis, which shoot from the main trunk of the tree. Fruit, also, enclosed. 
189. ?Pteris Brunoniana, a handsome fern – which, when fresh, is beautifully glaucous. If its venation (and perhaps its interrupted involucrum,) be sufficiently considered, as well as its habit, widely-differing from the other Pterideæ of N.Zealand, I suppose it will, (if not already done,) be removed to some other genus. 
190. Pt. tenuis, or affinis: –
191. 2 fine specimens of Lomaria filiformis; from a low shaded wood near the Waimate. I think you will pronounce these “good specimens.”
192. Metrosideros, from same locality as last No. 
[Metrosideros scandens]. 
193. Agrostis ?ovata, from ditto. 
			
(Nos. 194 to 207 incl., are plants from Hikurangi, a high mountain
capped with snow near the E. Cape) –

194. A small Coriaria, which I hope will prove new. 
[Coriaria thymifolia]. 
195. Four specs. of a plant; no flower nor fruit. 
196. Scrap of Dracophyllum, d——	d——
[Dracophyllum recurvum]. 
197. A specimen of a plant resembling ?P. Dieffenbachia, Tab. DXCVII, Ic. Plant., – only one specimen obtained. 
198. ?Phyllocladus, no fruit. 
[Phyllocladus alpinus]. 
199. Coprosma; only 1 specimen, with one solitary fruit. 
200. A plant (?Celmisia,) only one specimen, no flower nor fruit. 
201. A plant, with habit of preceding, no flower nor fruit. 
202. A shrubby plant, only one specimen, no fl. nor fr. 
[Senecio bidwillii]
203. A specimen of a plant (fruiting spike) – perhaps identical with a scrap formerly sent to you from Tongariro: vide, No. 
204. Specimen of a shrubby plant. 
205. Portion of a Lycopodium, no fruit. 
206. Small plants, no flower nor fruit. 
207. 1 leaf (pencil annotation “Perhaps Ranunculus? or Gunnera? new!”)
[Ranunculus insignis]
208. Specimen of a Parsonsia, (perhaps, heterophylla,) from Waiapu, near the E. Cape: – compare with No. 239, lot, Dec. /42. – Growing in shaded woods, & creeping to the tops of the trees. 
209. A moss, from stones in the River Moeangiangi, on which grew Nos. 21 and 23. –
210. A small moss-like Composit., from dry, barren & stony spots, Ahuriri, Hawke’s Bay. 
211. A moss from Parimahu, (a point of land a little to the North of Cape Turnagain of Cook;) – a small Helix on it, a species also found by me in the neighbourhood of the Bay of Islands. 
212. An elegant little Lichen, found on Metrosideros tomentosa, at Aotea, or Barrier Island. . 
213. A handsome Moss from the banks of the River Awatere, (6 miles inland from the mouth,) near the E. Cape. 
214. Elegant little Composit. plant, from sandy spots, mouth of the R. Awatere, – this plant grows densely cæspitose, and often spreads over a piece of sand, 3, 4, or 5 feet square. (vide, Nos. 29, & 30, in lot, Decr. /42.)
215. A Moss, from Tauranga, Bay of Plenty. 
216. A Grass, growing in tufts near the sea, Porangahau, E. Coast. 

________________

 
Algæ, &c. 
217. From Beaches near Cape Turnagain; when fresh of a most lovely appearance; colour, bright orange-red. (a Sertularia + some mistula.
218. From ditto. 
219. From ditto: much resembling when fresh the young branches of Dacrydium cupressinum, hence among the Natives it bears the same name, Rimu. 
220. From ditto: presenting, when fresh, a curious moniliform appearance. 
221. From ditto: the Natives eat the inner part of the head, or top, of this curious species raw, for which purpose they collect them after gales from sea-ward when they are thrown on shore; they call them Kaës; some grow to 2-3 feet in length. I saved several, but they stunk so intolerably (and being rainy weather I was obliged to wrap up my specimens in my clothes & blankets) that I was eventually obliged to throw them away. 
221. on tidal rocks, near Mataikona (this No. occurs twice). 
222. ditto		ditto. 
223. ditto		ditto. 
224. ditto		ditto. 
225. From Beaches near Cape Turnagain. 
226. ditto		ditto. 
227. ditto		ditto. 
228. ditto		ditto. 
229. ditto		ditto: this grows to several feet in length; sp. sent only tip of a frond. 
230. ditto		ditto. 
231. ditto		ditto. Sertularia. 
232. ditto		ditto. Sertularia. 
233. ditto		ditto. 
234. From near E. Cape, growing in little tufts on tidal rocks. 
_________
235. A many-branched Rush, from a deep swamp near Wangarei: –
236. Sp. of a Rubus with truncate & tridentate leaves, banks of River Wairua, near Wangarei. 
237. A Lycopodium, from Tutukaka, E. Coast; epiphytical on Metrosideros tomentosa; perhaps a small var. of L. flagellata. 
238. Specimens of a small tree, 18-24 feet high, of erect growth, & having much of the habit of the Mida genus; occasionally, though sparingly met with in the woods of the northern part of the N. Island: – I suspect it to be Olea apetala, Banks; of which plant I have not a description by me. From banks of the River Wairua; native name, Mairenui (i.e. large-leaved Maire; Mida of A. Cunn.) [Marginal note in pencil reads Olea apetala]. 
[Olea cunninghamii]
239. Sp. of a Rubus from Wairua, – a difft. species from 236, not in flower when I was there. 
240. Specimens of a most splendid Alseuosmia, (which I hope will prove a n. sp.,) from dense shaded forests, hilly range near Waiomio; an erect shrub, with branches somewhat diffuse, 6-8 feet high; flowering in September. See, No. 248, in lot, Decr. /42; which I think is the same plant. 
[Alseuosmia macrophylla]
241. Another fine and lovely plant of the same genus, from the same forest; plant more branching than last, 3-4 feet high; covered with a profusion of sweet flowers. [pencil annotation “Common largest”]. 
[Alseuosmia macrophylla]
242. A Maire (Mida, A.C.,) from a wood near Tutukaka, E. Coast; compare with No. 346, in lot, Decr. /42. [Pencil annotation “Mida common”]. 
[Fusanus cunninghamii]
243. Veronica diosmifolia, in fruit, from Waikare, Bay of Islands. 
[V. diosmæfolia]
244. Specimens of a Composit. tree, 12-18 feet high, erect, much branched, banks of Waikare River. I had long sought this plant in flower, but always unsuccessful until now – perhaps a species of Brachyglottis. Flowering in April. 
245. Specimens of a creeping Metrosideros (perhaps diffusa,) from the woods near Waimate: native name Kahikahika. 
[Metrosideros florida]
246. A few poor scraps of a parasitical Viscum, from a forest near Tutukaka, E. Coast: leaves decussate, much-veined; unfortunately they fell off in drying; no fl. nor fruit, August. 
247. Ranunculus hirtus, common in grassy damp spots, everywhere. 
248. Expanded Flowers of Hartighsea spectabilis, which I never saw until this season: when fresh they are most lovely, being of a delicate green colour. Vide, No. 188. 
249. Specimens with Fruit of Passiflora tetrandra, from woods near Waimate. A plant of which it is difficult to get either flowers or fruit, from its situation luxuriating as it does among the topmost branches of the highest trees. Its fruit, too, is greedily devoured by birds. 
250. An Oxalis, – from grassy spots, Waimate. 
[Oxalis corniculata]
251. Specimen of a Lycopodium, which I have long sought for in fruit but without success; it grows both creeping & erect, on clayey hills, in the neighbourhood of the Bay of Islands. 
[Lycopodium cernuum]
252. Small Epilobium, from skirts of a wood near Waimate: – perhaps thymifolium, of R. Cunn. 
253. Trichomanes ?venosum, parasitical on Cyathea dealbata, woods near Waimate. 
254. Lichen on bark of Leucopogon fasciculatus )  From
255. Ditto, on Earth			              )  Sulphur 
256. Moss, ditto			              )  Springs,
257. Fungi, d––			              )  near 	               
258. Jungermannia, do––		              ) Waimate.
259.)
260.)  Lichens from Trees, shaded spots, Waimate. 
261.)
262.)
263.)  Mosses,		ditto,	ditto. 
264.)
265. Fungi, terrestrial, growing together in a cluster, Waimate. 
 # 

A list of Botanical Specimens contained in parcels marked “I, II, and III, from Wangarei, &c.,” with remarks on several of the same. 

320. Large Moss found in dry woods, (near roots of Fagus.)  Head of Wangarei Bay; could not detect its fructification. –
321. Like on Carmichælia, from damp woods, Wangarei. 
322. Plagianthus – from banks of Ngunguru River, E. Coast; tree, 25-40 feet: my only preserved spec. 
323. A Gnaphalium, with trinerved leaves, (n. sp. ?) near G. Keriense, which, however, is said to be “enerviis”. 
[G. keriense]
324. Specimens of Parapara; a plant (sent in last parcel, No. 25) from E. Coast near Ngunguru. –
324. ditto, wood of same; much shrunk in drying. 
325. A curious little bitubercled Lycopodium; discovered in open clayey grounds, shores of Wangarei Bay, in October, 1841: found, also, by Dr. Jos. Hooker, in the neighbourhood of the Bay of Islands. –
325. ditto in phial. –
326. Specimen of an Alseuosmia, from dry woods, head of Wangarei Bay, which, though near A. linariifolia, A. Cunn., I suppose to be a new species, its habit being so very different. Its leaves, too, are longer, midrib & petioles villous, and flowers axillary and terminal. It is the largest shrub I have yet seen of the Genus: height, 5-7 feet. All the specimens sent, with many others, were gathered from one plant. A. Hookeria, Mss., W.C. 
327. Specimens (plenty!) of a Tree, 15-20 feet, with but few branches, which grows on certain headlands of the Eastern Coast; namely, nr. the South Head of Wangaruru Bay, overhanging the sea on a headland in Wangarei Bay, and near the East Cape, (the only localities in which it has hitherto been met with, or, according to the native account, in which it is to be found). Its fruit is large, and very handsome, though not of any known use, of a yellow colour streaked with carmine, containing 3 large seeds. I have preserved you 2 in acid, (not, however, the finest) and send you, also, several seeds. I sent you a small, and bad specn., in my last, (No. 10) on which occasion I ventured to suggest it might prove a new sp. of Pittosporum! To which conclusion I was led from its habit, &c. I scarce need say that I have long since been satisfied to the contrary. The Native name for it, is, Tawa-a-pou. 
328. A new sp. of Pterostylis, discovered in low marshy grounds, on the Southern shores of Wangarei Bay, Octr., 1842. I venture to think that this will prove identical with the Orchideous plant detected by me in a swamp during my Journey last summer, and numbered 111, in the parcel now sent. Its time of flowering, when I passed, had scarcely arrived: I gained, however, after diligent search, a specimen or two with unfolded perianth. 
      – ditto in phial. –
329. A Cyperaceous plant with large fruit, from a damp wood near Tutukaka, E. Coast, Oct. 1842. ?An potius Lampocarya species. 
330. A Rubus with suborbiculate leaves, very much truncate at apex, from a wood on the E. Coast, nr. Matapouri, Octr., 1842. A n. sp., or a var. of R. Schmideloides, A. Cunn. ?
331. A Lycopodium, quite new to me, from marshy, clayey ground, Southern shore of Wangarei Bay; growing with L. laterale, but differing much from that sp. in habit, this being erect, and almost invariably bifurcate. 
332. A prize! Specimens of the Kawaka pine with young fruit and old ? capsules. These specimens, I think, will fully prove, what I have always suspected, that this beautiful pine is misplaced under the Genus Dacrydium. What a time have I patiently waited in hopes of seeing this plant in fruit! Year after year rolled by, and I still assiduously sought it, but in vain. Until October last, when I was rewarded with an abundance of such specimens as are now gladly sent. The Tree which bore them was a small one, not more than 30 feet high and 14 inches in diameter. From a forest on the high range, nr. Tutukaka, E. Coast. 
333. Another n. sp. of Lauraceæ: a handsome tree with large oblong-obovate glabrous leaves, 10-15 feet high; from the dense woods 10 miles N.W. from the head of Wangarei Bay; Octr., 1842. Of the ?same genus as a species sent in last lot, numbered 14, (to which genus others now sent, numbered 197, 334 and 338, doubtless, belong). The wood of this Tree has a very spicy smell when cut or broken. Native name, Horopito. Octr., 1842. 
333. Wood of ditto. –
334. Another species of the same genus, with midrib of leaves hispid; a small tree, 10-12 feet high. From a wood in the interior, half-way between Wangarei and Wangaruru Bays, E. Coast; Octr., 1842. This may prove to be a var. of the sp. (No. 14) formerly sent. 
[Drimys colorata]
335. (no entry)
336. A specimen from a dwarf tree of the genus Melicytus, which I suppose to be a different species from those two already known. A small branching tree, or rather shrub, 6-7 feet high; hilly range near Wangaruru Bay; Octr.,/42. M. collina, n. sp. (?) Mss. W.C. 
[Melicytus macrophyllus]
337. A species of Crucifereæ, very common everywhere in stony gravelly places by the sides of streams; not, however, mentioned in Cunningham’s Precursor. Plant, procumbent, and ascending. Native name, Poniu. 
338. Another species of the same genus, with oblong-lanceolate leaves; a small tree, 6 feet high: alluvial soil, woods, banks of the River Wairua; Octr. /42. 
[Drimys axillaris]
339. Coprosma arcuata, n. sp., W.C., take the follg. as a descriptn. Foliis (parvis) obovato-oblongis, subspathulatisne, truncates emarginatisne basi attenuatis petiolatis  glabris subfasciculatis margine incrassatis; ramis valde arcuatis dependentibus, ramulis villosis; caulis arbusculus sesquiorgyalibus, gracilis. – Hab. Damp shaded woods, about 6 miles N.W. from the head of Wangarei harbour; Octr. 1842. 
340. Specimens of a sea-side species of Leucopogon: a low rambling procumbent shrub, sometimes forming dense bushes; originally discovered by me near Cape M. v. Diemen, and sent to Cunningham, who, however, did not live to examine it. Mr. Heward, in a letter I have lately received from him, informed me, that this species is, in all probability, identical with L. Richei, R. Br.; on gravelly spots, dry rocky headlands, and on sand hillocks, near the sea, E. & W. Coasts; March,/38, and Octr. /42. On referring to my Memoranda, I find that I sent you a scrap of this plant, in the last lot, Numbd. 41. 
341. Leafing of a small diffuse Myrtaceous Tree, 8-12 feet high, (sent, I think, in last lot, No. 23, and, perhaps, a var. of a specimen now sent, numbered 194,) from the margin of a wood, 14 miles N.W. from the head of Wangarei harbour; Octr. /42. 
342. Specimens of a perennial herbaceous plant, from low ground, skirts of woods, Tamatarau, N. Shore of Wangarei Bay; Octr. /42. I have only hitherto met with it in this locality. Plant, 1-3 feet high, branched, & diffuse. 
343. I suppose this to be Myrsine divaricata, R. Cunn., from sea-shore, Owae, Wangaruru Bay, E. Coast; Octr.,1842. 
344.) Specimens of two shrubs, or small trees, which, for 
345.) several years, have greatly puzzled me. Many times, indeed, have I sought the flowers and fruit of these plants, but, hitherto, in vain. They are both very peculiar in their habit and general appearance. I have seen some as high as 12 feet, but their common average is from 6-9 feet. The Natives call them, Kaëí; and use their long, thong-like branches to make traps to catch eels in; which traps are manufactured much in the manner of our wire mousetraps; or wicker lobster-creels. For some time, I supposed these shrubs to be the young plants of some species of the Taxaceous genera, but, as I now know all those plants well, I can but reject that opinion. The Natives assert, that they never grow any larger, nor bear any flower nor fruit, (?) and that they are not the young plants of any known species of the Taxaceous kind. I still hope to discover somewhat more concerning them ere long. I send you, however, specimens, such as they are, to have your opinion upon them. Hab. thinly scattered in dense shaded forests, generally. 
346. Mira undulata, n. sp., Mss. W.C., (a bad specimen). I consider this a new species of Cunningham’s genus, Mida. Foliis obovato-oblongis acuminates undulates. A small tree, 12-20 feet, in dense forests, near Wangarei; and, also, near the River Wairua; Octr., 1842. Native name, Maire, (which is their name for all the species, mistaken by R. C.  for Mida; vide, gen. char.). I believe this to be identical with the scrap, No. 19, in my last. The wood of all the Maire species, being close-grained, dark & heavy, was preferred by the Natives for the making into weapons of war. The word is often used, proverbially, in speaking of anyone who is noticed for obstinacy, or for a tenacious adherence to old superstitions. –
[Fusanus cunninghamii]
347. [This number does not occur in the list]
[Scirpus frondosus]
348.) Cardamine, n. sp.? At least differing from C. 
414.) debilis, Solr., which is described as being  “glabrous”: this being villous & ciliated. From the sides of running stream near Wangarei; Octr. 1842
[Cardamine hirsuta]
349. [This number does not occur in the list]
[Trisetum antarcticum]
350. A Pterostylis, with numerous lanceolate bracts, which, if not a new and distinct species, is a continued variety of my Pt. collina. I have noticed this plant for several years, common in dry, shady, mossy banks, in woods and thickets; generally growing together with Pt. collina. 
351. A specimen of what I, at present, consider to be a large var. of my Dicksonia lanata, (vide, Filices Novæ, Mss., No. 18). 
352. A curious black fungus parasitical on Cyperaceæ, from skirts of a wood on the high range between Wangaruru and Wangarei Bays; Octr. 1842. I first noticed this peculiar fungus some years ago. –
353. Lichen	)
354. Jungermannia	)  All from the Country between 
355. Moss	)  the Bay of Islands
356. Moss	)  & Wangarei Bay, E. Coast;	     
357. Jungermannia	)  Octr. 1842.
358. Lichen	) 
359. Specimens of the male flowers of the Fagus, sent in last lot, No. 42, which I was fortunate enough at this visit to obtain: the female flowers I have not yet discovered. Capsules, however, of a distinct (?) but very closely-allied species will be found in another parcel, No. 88. From dry woods, nr. the head of Wangarei harbour; Octr. 1842. 
360. A Moss from a living tree in a wood at Haukawakawa, 6 miles N.W. from Wangarei Bay; Octr. /42. 
361. ?Algæ from a rivulet near Wangarei. 
362.) Black Fungi, pretty & curious when fresh, parasitical on fallen Timber, shaded
363.) damp woods, at Waikare, Bay of Islands; 1841. 
364. Moss, from a clayey bank. 	)  same
365. ditto		ditto		)  locality as 
366. Jungermannia	ditto		)  preceding.
367. A peculiar Lichen from among stunted fern, Sandy plains, near the sea-shore, Matapori, E. Coast; Octr., 1842. The ground, in some places, appearing as if literally strewed with them. 
368. Jungermannia. 
369. A minute Moss. 
370. A Lichen. 
371. A fine Lichen, from the outer dry rocky headland in Pataua Creek, near Wangarei, E. Coast. 
372. A Black Lichen from trees overhanging shore at Wangarei Bay. 
373. Foliaceous Lichen )  Parasitical on Cordyline australis
374. Small Moss	      )   near Wairua, Octr. /42. 
 
375.)
376.)  Mosses from a dry bank, Pataua Creek, E. Coast. 
377.)
378. A Lichen cut from Vitex littoralis, in a wood near the sea shore; E. Coast. 
379. Fruit of Vitex littoralis: phœnicean red, when ripe
380.)
381.)  Jungermannia from a wet wood near Wangarei. 
382.)
383. A Moss. 
384. An elegant little Moss, apparently scarce, from a tree, in a wood, near Wairua. 
385. A Moss. 
386. Fruit of Electryon excelsum, Gært. 
387. Sphæria Robertsii, fresh specimens which I dug up in a wood near the E. Coast; Octr., 1842. 
388. Curious specimen of Niphobolus (rupestris et bicolor) from the upper branches of Corynocarpus lævigatus. It is to be observed, that this fern commonly assumes this appearance, whenever the upper extremity of its creeping caudex being detached from the tree or rock to which it had fastened itself, becoming pendulous, is blown about with the wind. I think that this plant has quite a predilection for the Corynocarpus, the latter being seldom seen, of any size, without being clothed with the thick coriaceous fronds of the former, often climbing a height of 40 feet, or more, to its highest branches. 
389. Orange-coloured ciliated Fungus, on Horse-litter. 
  380β. Rose-colour headed Lichen, from clayey barren hills, Bay of Islands. 
  381β. Light red Lichen, on bark of Leptospermum ericoides; Pahia, Bay Islands. 
  382β. Lilac Lichen; shaded dells, By. Islands. 
  383β. Jungermannia, on bark of Leptospermum ericoides, Bay of Islands. 
  384β. Grey Lichen,	)  from living trees, damp 				)  woods, Waikare,
  385β. Moss		)  Bay of Islands
  386β. Moss from wet, stony, humid woods,	)
  387β. Moss		)		) Waikare,
  388β. Dark-Grey Lichen	)		)  Bay of 
389. Moss		) from living trees,	)  Islands
390. ?Jungermannia	) damp woods	)
391. Small Moss from clayey grounds,	)
392. Small Jungermannia		)   Waikare, By. 	    
393. Moss,			)   Islands
394. Moss			)
395.)  Lichens from dry
396.)  rocky spots. 
397. A black Lichen, from Kerikeri waterfall	)  Bay of
398. A Lichen from clayey grounds		)  Islands
399. ?Polyphorus, sp., from decaying trees, humid woods, ditto. 
400. ?Marchantia, common in both dry and damp ditto but shaded spots, Bay of Islands. 
401. Moss	) from Waikare,
402. ditto	 	) B. Islands. 
403. Lichen, from Kerikeri waterfall. 
404. Moss (scrap of) from Waikare. 
405. Small specimen of a Pimelia, from Ngunguru, E. Coast, When there, in October last, I discovered this plant; it was not then, however, in flower; I pointed out the plant to a Settler residing in that neighbourhood, who promised to send me flowering specimens; he has since done so, but, unfortunately, has merely sent me the tips of the branches. It is a handsome bushy-headed little shrub, 1-2 feet high. Perhaps, after all, only a var. of P. virgata, although I took it (when I first saw it) for a distinct species. I have not a description of P. virgata by me. 
406. Scrap of a Moss, from Waiapu valley, E. Cape; overlooked until now. 
407. Peculiar orbicular-shaped Algæ, found on this Beach, thrown up after heavy Gales. 
408. A small Moss from damp brick walls in this Station. 
409. An Orchis, n. sp.? from high open grounds near Temateatai, Wangaruru Bay; Octobr. 1841. 
410. A little, weak, procumbent (and erect, when growing thickly together in favorable sheltered & shady spots,) Monœcious plant; from alluvial soil, sides of Ngunguru River, E. Coast; Octr., 1841. Identical with scrap No. 75, in last. –
411. A little procumbent plant, from woods and cliffs, shores, E. Coast; (vide, 76 in last lot). (Drymaria). 
412. Hymenophyllum imbricatum, n. sp., (vide, Filices Novæ, Ms., No. 30,)
413. Jungermannia. 
414. Cardamine, vide, ante, 348. 
415. Jungermannia, (perhaps J. Hymenophyllum,) from clayey sides of dark damp ravines, woods, Bay of Islands. 
416. Jungermannia. 
417.     )     ?Conferva, from a small
  417β. )     river near Waikare
418. Galium, from the banks of a river, southern shore of Wangarei Bay: somewhat, I think, differing from Cunningham’s 2 species. 
419. Alectryon excelsum, (bad specimens, but all I have)
420. Cheilanthes pellucida, n. sp. (vide, Filices Novæ, Ms., No. 15.)
421. ?Trophis – Male flowers only. I have never seen the female flowers of this plant, although I have sought them assiduously. – Perhaps the specimens now sent, numbered 228, may prove to be its fruit. – A fine dark-green foliaged tree, from 20 to 40 feet high, or more; often found on the sides of rivers and skirts of woods. – From Waikare, Bay of Islands; Novr., 1842. 
422. Specimens of a small and handsome shrub from the sandy shores of Matapouri, E. Coast; Octr., 1842. It forms dense impenetrable bushes, and grows rigidly to the height of 5-8 feet. I call it handsome, from the profusion of lively yellow flowers and crimson drupæ with which it is mostly laden. This plant is numerous there, but I have only seen it in this locality, and always in fruit. I send you a quantity of fruit, (to the drying of which I have paid some attention) in hopes of introducing it into our English Shrubberies. I, certainly, sent you specimens of this plant before, (having discovered it in 1839) but these, I think, are very superior specimens. 
423. A large Fungus, which grows on the Fagus, at Wangarei. Always found pendulous from beneath, and at the junction of the large branches with the trunk. The one sent is a small one; some measure from 4 to 6 feet across. In the fresh state they are very heavy from being full of water; when dry they soon decay on the outside. The Natives use them for tinder, for which purpose they are admirably adapted. Native name Putawa. 
424. A fine specimen of a coalescent Lomaria; (L. discolor, Willd.,) one that I brought from the ever-humid forests of the interior. In such places, far away from “busy man”, this fern is often found in this coalescent state. 
425. A truncheon, from a branch of Corynocarpus lævigatus. 
426. A specimen of Coprosma: C. divaricata, A.C., or a n. sp. From a wood near Wangarei; Octr. 1842. 
427. Algæ from Brackish water (junction of the tide with fresh-water) Kawakawa river, Bay of Islands. 
428-430. Algæ, from E. Coast, between Cape Brett, and Wangarei. 
431. Section from a tree of Vitex littoralis: having room in the Box I thought I would put it in. I cut a truncheon from a branch, but the wood was quite soft!
432. Truncheon from a tree, Hedycaria genus; probably H. dentata. 
433. Four baskets of Native manufacture, from the tribe inhabiting the East Cape district. You will perceive that Phormium tenax is the article employed. The black colour is given by steeping the Phormium in a strong decoction of the bark of Elæocarpus Hinau for two days, and then laying the same in the ferruginous mud of some chalybeate water until the colour is dark enough; the oxide (or peroxide) of iron, which is common everywhere in New Zealand, so acting with the tannin principle of the Hinau as to strike a permanent black. –
434. Cyrtostylis reniforme (?) Young, in spirits. 
435. An extract from the bark of a certain tree which a white man residing here has made, and asserts to be equivalent to Catechu; I got a little, which I send to you, to get, if possible, critically analysed. The whole affair is, as yet, secret. –
436. Pulverised bark of a tree, from the same person, which has much the appearance & taste, of Cinchona.  I send this, to be, if possible, nicely tested. I shall be sure of knowing, by-and-bye, the trees which produce both preparations. 

I have, also, added several specimens of Cordyline, Myoporum, Pittosporum, Oxalis, Geranium, Senecio, &c &c which I am pretty sure you have already; but as there was spare room I have put them in. Cordyline australis, is now in full bloom & looking lovely – with its fine drooping white flowered thyrses, some of which are three feet in length!
 
19 November 1844
	
		Paihia, Bay of Islands,
		November 19, 1844,

To
Sir W. J. Hooker, K. H. 
&c &c &c &c
Royal Gardens
KEW

My dear Sir William
The “Bolina” barque being about to leave this Colony for England affords me an opportunity of transmitting you this note, just to inform you that I am on the eve of leaving this neighbourhood for Hawkes Bay, where I shall in future reside. I last wrote you on the 30th. May /44 pr. Mr. Busby, and sent you several specimens (in a Case and Tinn Cannister) under the kind care of that gentleman; which I hope you will safely receive. I, also, wrote you on the 7th and 26th March, preceding, enclosing small specimens of 3 new Ferns. I have not heard from you for a considerable time, (the last being a note pr. Mr. McCormick dated Sept. 27 1843,) and am daily on the lookout for some intelligence particularly concerning the living plants sent you pr. HMS “Tortoise” as I much wish to hear of your having received them, and of their doing well in your Gardens at Kew,
I am just returned from a visit to Wangarei, and neighbourhood – my last! – and, as I am sending a small Box to Mr Coates of the C M House, I send you a few scraps which I gleaned in my journey. I think you will find them to answer to the following numbers: – 
No. 1. Male flowers of Dacrydium excelsum from Ngunguru E. Coast, and River Wairua in the interior. I supposed, in a former letter, this tree to be diœcious, and I have now proved it to be so beyond a doubt, having seen hundreds of trees this season bearing either only male flowers or female fruit: and the old natives assure me (though their corroborative assertion is surely not needed) that the male trees never bore any fruit. The Kahikatea forests are now quite gay from the quantity of male trees bearing such a profusion of flowers of a reddish colour; this, however, only happens occasionally, and when such is the case, the natives rejoice in the prospect of a good year of koroi (of female fruit, the fleshy receptacle on which the ovule is situated being a choice article of food). And I think it is from the fact of such an event occurring but seldom, that the native proverb of Ko a te tau koroi (at the year of koroi) originated. This proverb is used when the doing of any thing is put off beyond the time specified – as payment of wages, &c. – or when promises are reiterated. The small specimens sent are from Ngunguru. 
2. Flowering specimen of a sp. of Rubus, from the banks of the River Wairua: I think, however, I sent you this before. 
3. Specimens of the flowers of a sp. of Astelia, which I believe to be quite distinct from both A. Banksii and A. Solandri; those 2 species are generally epiphytical, or (especially the latter) found growing on cliffs & shaded nooks near the sea; but this species I have only observed growing in cold wet and clayey grounds; its leaves somewhat resemble those of A. Banksii but are much shorter; its head of flowers is very dense, and flower-stalk very short., while the panicle of A. Banksii is loose and stalk longer: I have not, however, compared the flowers of the two species. From A. Solandri it differs altogether. It grows plentifully in valleys, on the wet slopes of low hills, and on the sides of brooks; but is rarely met with in flower. Its fruit is a small orange-coloured berry, containing shining-black seeds – some of which, I think, I formerly sent you. From wet grounds, slopes of hills, near the River Wairua. A difficult plant to dry from its dense head of flowers; these sent are only small branchlets torn from the same. I regret that I have not a sp. of the vernation by me. 
4.) Poor specimens of small female flowers of a sp. of ?Trophis; a diœcious tree, the male-flowering specimens of which I have already sent you, (vide, sp. no, 421 in lot sent Decr. /42) and, I think, fruit, (vide, sp. No. 288 in the same lot). 
5. A small and pretty Oxalis possessing leaves glaucous underneath; from shady spots rich alluvial soil immediate banks of the River Wairua. I hope this may prove a n. sp. 
6.) A Viola from same locality & growing with preceding. 
7.) A small Cardamine from ditto ditto. This is certainly new; I believe I sent you poor specimens before of this little plant, and ventured to think it a different species, but from these I trust you will find it to be quite distinct from C. debilis, the only sp. mentioned by Cunningham. There are, I think, several Cardamine in N. Zealand, and the whole family wants close examining. 
8. A little ?Myosotis from ditto ditto. 
9.) Fruit of Olea apetala (at least I suppose so) from same tree as flowering specimens, No. 238, in lot sent in May 1844, pr. Mr. Busby. Fruit of a lovely crimson colour when ripe. Tree scarce. 
10.) Elæocarpus, n. sp., native name Mahimahi: vide fruiting specimens, No. 12, in lot sent in July 1841: from banks of the River Wairua, the only locality I have yet detected it in. 
11.) A Lycopodium ?n. sp., or a var of L. laterale; this, however, grows erect. Found among Leptospermum scoparium and Junceæ on clayey grounds near Kaiwa, Wangarei. 
12. A flowering specimen of a small bushy Chenopodium, – formerly sent (– From immediate shores of Wananaki Bay, E. Coast, growing with Salicornia indica. A difficult plant to dry, from its many fleshy succulent leaves. 
13.) A Ranunculus, hirtus, from near Te Ruakaka, Wangarei Bay, which, when I gathered it, I supposed to be a n. sp. – 
14. A small Hypericum, of cæspitose growth, (perhaps pusillum,) from low grounds near Waipuakakaho, in the interior: only 3 specimens brought away for examination, of which I send you two. 
15. Specimens of a fine Leptospermum, a full and free branched shrub or small tree, 12-15 feet high, growing on the banks of the River Wairua. I have often noticed this plant and wished for good specimens, but, from not detecting its flower nor fruit, I have, until this last journey, been disappointed. In this it differs much from L. scoparium & L. ericoides, which are almost all the year round in flower, especially L. scoparium. I think you will find it to be a n. sp., new, at least, to New Zealand. Its long sericous leaves, and large and thin capsules always gaping at their dissepiments, tell me, at first glance, it must be distinct from L. scoparium. I have, also, observed this plant in close dry woods on the hills near Mangati on the E. Coast. There is, also, a small black Fungus scattered on its leaves, The whole of the Leptospermum genus, natives of N.Zealand, requires careful examination and comparison. 
16. A specimen of a Juncaceous plant found growing in very large circular & spreading tufts, on dry stony hills in this neighbourhaod. From Te Ranga, a high hill near Waikare, Bay of Islands. 
17. A Schizæa from clayey grounds near Kaiwa, Wangarei Bay, (growing with No. 11). It struck me as possessing a distinct character, in its being elegantly and closely dotted down each side of the whole length of its stipe – somewhat like Cyathea medullaris – and which I do not recollect noticing in S. propinqua. I have not, however, compared them. 
[S. fistulosa]
18.) A small Hymenophyllum, detected growing in a densely cæspitose manner on the upper branches of a tree in a forest between Wairua and Waiomio – perhaps a var. of H. imbricatum: very few fronds only found, after a long & diligent search, bearing fruit. 
19 & 20. a Lichen: 19 on Carmichælia australis; 20 on Leptospermum scoparium, from banks of the River Waiaruhe, nr. the Waimate. 
There are one or two to other scraps, such as, flowering specimens of Melicope simplex, an elegant shrub; and of a narrow leaved Alseuosmia, perhaps A. lineariifolia: a fruiting specimen of a Pittosporum, already sent, &c. 
I think I have discovered a 
n. sp. of Libertia, at least the char. of 
its petals told me so, they were thus: – 
I observed it at Horahora near Ngunguru, but have not a good specimen to send you. 
I regret not having something more worthy your attention, but, nil desperandum, by-and-bye I trust to secure you some plants worth your notice. 
During the whole of the past year I have had but little time for recreation; Botany, therefore, has been almost laid aside. For in preparing for orders (to which I was admitted by our Bishop in September last,) I was obliged to keep very close to studies of a different nature. The delightful Science of Botany will, however, be ever dear to me, for closely connected with it are very many bright reminiscences of the past – both of living and departed friends; and, prospectively, with its aid, I hope to fill up many a half hour’s meditation in my lonely wanderings – to expand the mind more & more in contemplating the goodness & wisdom of the Mighty Creator in even his smallest and (to man) most insignificant works – and, by such little healthy exercises, to reinvigorate both mind & body for future exertion. 
And now, my dear Sir William, I must end this almost worthless epistle. Pray remember me most kindly & affectionately to my dear friend your Son, who I hope is well and doing well in every respect, and
Believe me
with every respect
Ever most sincerely yours
William Colenso

finally closed,
Saturday Night, 
Novr. 30/44

 # 



19 January 1846


Mission Station, Waitangi near Cape
Kidnapper, January 19, 1846. 


Sir W. J. Hooker, K. H.,
&c. &c. &c. 
Royal Bot. Gardens,
Kew. 


My dear Sir William,
Very many times during the last year have I been on the tiptoe of expectation in hopes of receiving a letter from you – if only an acknowledgement of my dried and living plants having reached you – but in vain. The year closed and no remembrance from England. The New Year, however, has been ushered in with brighter hopes, for only two days ago I received a case (apparently packed at the warehouse of the C. M. Society), containing, among other things, a number of Botanical and other Books, which, had it not been for your well-known handwriting on some of them, I should have been quite at a loss to know to whom I am indebted for them. In sending me these, my dear Sir William, you have laid me under fresh obligations which may never be in any ways cancelled. I would however, that I had been honored with a letter – for it is now a very long while since I had such gratification – your last, now before me, being dated September 27/43. I know very well that your time is very valuable and fully occupied, and so is Dr. Hooker’s – witness the mass of Botanical matter (both in description and drawings) resulting from deep research and close investigation which you are both engaged in bringing to light. Your Ic. Plant., and Lond. Journ. of Bot. tell me, that some of my dried plants have reached you, but I have never heard anything respecting the fate of the living plants which I sent you pr. H.M.S. “Tortoise” and in the welfare of some of which I, unfortunately, have allowed myself to feel too great an interest. 
I have just completed my first year of residence on this all but unknown part of N.Z. – during which time I have had a very great deal to do and to endure, and not a little of things (unpleasant enough) always attendant upon forming a new Station in a Heathen land, – more especially when far away from any assistance. However, I have managed to travel twice throughout the District (which extends on to Wellington, more than 2o by Chart), and have penetrated a short way into the Interior, over the Ruahine chain of mountains, which 8 months of the year are covered with snow; – and have, also, gone so far N. as Poverty Bay: so that out of 365 I have been out “a bushing” more than 160 days. And to this I should have added another projected journey into the Interior, but severe fever in May and June completely stopped all my movements; from the effects of which I am not yet wholly recovered. I make mention of my journeyings to you, as from them you may infer, that I continue to make some progress towards gleaning a little more in order to the better elucidation of the Botany of my adopted country. In a little while I hope to send you a small case of Dried Specimens; some of which I would were with you now. I have already obtained several new things – new to me in every respect – and, I believe, of genera new to N. Zealand. Some of them will, doubtless, become Garden flowers; and some of them, will, I think, be found to be if not the same species closely allied ones to several of those published in Nos. I-IX of “Antarctic Bot.” – I will just mention a few new plants of genera known to me: – 2 or 3 Ranunculi: one, a very fine caulescent species, distinct from R. nivicola and apparently between that sp. and R. pinguis; a plant 3-4 feet high, having large reniform crenate (but not lobed) anastomosing leaves, 4-6 inches broad; petals, 5, large distinct, obovato-cuneate or flabelliform; of this plant, which I obtained from the heights of the Ruahine Chain, I have three flourishing here in my garden; one, which has flowered, has been cut and is now drying for you. A Fuchsia, a climber, a fine plant, evidently between F. excorticata and F. procumbens. – A pretty Myrtus with obovate-spathulate leaves, deeply emarginate. – An Eryngo. – 3 or 4 Veronicæ; one of which made me both vexed and pleased, for it proved to me without doubt the error into which you had been led respecting Podocarpus Dieffenbachii. No Botanist, however, who had seen the plant growing could possibly have supposed it to belong to any large sized hardwoods genus, from its manner of growth, growing much like a rose-bush, 8-12 stems from the same root; a habit which none of those trees of larger growth – though stunted on the mountain’s top – ever possess. 2 elegant-flowered Loranthi, 1 or 2 Dracophylla – 2 or 3 Oxales. A large and handsome Celmisia, a Helychrisum; a Lactuca; and several other Compositæ. – A Geranium – A graceful and sweet smelling Carmichælia (the leafy specimen which I sent you in my lot per Mr. Busby No. 50β, confirmed) – odorata would be a good sp. name for this plant – A curious plant of Epacrideæ perhaps a Drapetes. Another ?Mazus – An Ourisia, I hope a new one – 2 or 3 Ferns, mostly Asplenia – A Clematis – A ?Gunnera – 2 or 3 plants of Araliaceæ. A sweet little plant which I sincerely hope will prove to be Forstera sedifolia or a new sp. of that curious and little-known genus – An Aciphylla, perhaps squarrosa – A Myosotis very fine, 2 or 3 Epilobia – Another Coriaria. An elegant ?Smyrnia – 2 or more Orchideæ – 2 or more Gramineæ – Ditto Carices Ditto Aquatic Plants, very curious with long spiral peduncles – A ?Dichondra – A small Convolvulus – A fine flowered though small plant of Labiatæ. A curious little plant, Triand. Prys, ovary containing 3 black seeds – An Urtica – A Wahlenbergia (fine) – 2 or more Gnaphalia – A Metrosideros. A ?Hoheria. A Pentachondra or Leucopogon. A Plantago &c. &c. and several very curious plants from the mountain top, which I cannot so much as guess at. Together with Algæ, Musci and Jungermanniæ. All of which, I hope, will be with you about Xmas next. And I sincerely hope they will be in time to aid my dear friend Dr. Joseph in his N.Z. botany. – 
I just write this, my dear Sir William, to let you know where I am and what doing of. I am just about leaving for another 2 months journey, but the roads – or, rather, route, for roads there are none – are so bad that I can scarcely manage to secure and carry anything which I may collect. However, every journey adds some trifle to the amount already collected. 
All the species novæ of genera which I have mentioned as possessing, are written from memory, and from what I supposed them to be at the time of gathering. Since which I have not so much as seen them: so you will have to make great allowances. 
With my very kind regards to Dr. Hooker, whom I exult to find so well and so agreeably employed – 
Believe me,
My dear Sir William,
Ever most faithfully yours,
William Colonso. 


P.S. Among the Books sent was a small packet from Prof. Owen, containing a letter, dated, October 1843! – When you write, or send, Direct,
Care of Rev. R. Cole, A.M.,
Parsonage,
Wellington. 


P.S. I just copy for your information, or amusement, or both, – an outline of a rough description of what I have called a “n. sp. of Ourisia” – which I noted down at the time of finding and examining. – 

Plant creeping: Leaves, ovate, dimidiate, crenate 3-5 in. long, 1½-2¾ lat., deeply veined, glabrous, colored at base: Leaves of Scape 4, ovate-acuminate, 5-nerved, obtuse, sessile, opposite, 5-6 serratures towards apex; serratures obtuse and colored; margin ciliate at base of leaves; – upper scape-leaves, six, ovate-lanceolate, 3-nerved margin colored; topmost scape-leaves, 5: Petioles, 2½-3 in. long, ciliate: calyx 7-cleft, linear, knobbed, glabrous, sub-roridus, obsoletely 3-nerved, colored at apices, latitudinally corrugated at middle and base, sub-equitant before æstivation: Corolla 6-7 cleft, obsoletely nerved; 4 lower div. of limb, wedge-shaped, emarginate or truncate; 2-3 upper ditto, sub-orbiculate, somewhat truncate and emarginate; throat beset internally with yellow-colored clavate succulent hairs, externally slightly haired: Stamens, 5, 3 long 2 short: Anthers sub-obcordate depressed or sub-reniform produced and innate, before and sub-orbiculate and adnate after bursting: Style exserted and clavate towards apex: Stigma orbiculate, papillose, sub-bipartite, purple-colored: Peduncles hairy, colored, 2½ in. long. 
Hab. sides of R. Makororo, which descends from the Ruahine Chain of Mountains into Hawke’s Bay. – Feb. 1845; flowering in September. 


 # 


 
31 July 1846
			
		Waitangi, nr. Cape Kidnapper,
	     E. Coast of N. Zealand., July 31/46. 

Sir W. J. Hooker, K. H.,
&c. &c. &c. 
Royal Botanic Gardens,
Kew, London. 

My dear Sir William,
I have this day finished looking over culling and putting up a lot of dried specimens for you, in numbers beyond 600 of which I hope 300 (at least) will be found to be desirable, and 50, or more entirely new. I regret that some of them are so very bad as they are – they having rotted in carrying during a fortnight of incessant rain in a densely wooded country: – a time which severely tried our health as well as our patience. I have sent you portions 2/3rds and more of everything I have laid hands on, and have numbered them all, or nearly so; and that, principally, for this reason – should you wish to get any better specimens of any of the scraps, in your sending me the No. I shall be the better able to secure them for you, I have, also, given you a List (in the Case) with a few remarks en passant which, brief as they are, may not altogether be unacceptable. You will also find a few Bones for Prof. Owen; and a small parcel for a Mr. Octavius Browne, which I have ventured to trouble you with. (Mr. Browne’s Brother died here in N.Z. a short time ago, and as his family wished to obtain, if possible, his Bible, I, fearing it might be lost if sent singly, have put it into the corner of the case x: – Mr. B. is a person of respectability, his elder brother being a Major in the Army). 
(Monday, August 3rd) – I am obliged to write by snatches. I have this day sent off the case to the Harbour (8 miles distant) to a little vessel bound for Wellington – thence to proceed pr. first vessel to England. I have heard, that the “Ralph Bernal” (lately arrived) sails homeward in September, by which ship, I suppose, both this letter and the Case will go. Having written so very much (considering how greatly pressed I am for time) for you, in the “List” – this letter will necessarily be short. How is it, my dear Sir William that so many of the Native names of places and things get so often misspelt – both in “the Lond. Jour. of Bot.” and in the “Icones plant.”? – I can but think that I wrote them plainly. If it be at all desirable to make known the locality, such can only be attained by strictly adhering to the orthography; for such is the construction of the N.Z. language (possessing only 14 letters) that the omission or alteration of a single letter in a word is sufficient wholly to destroy its meaning, or (what is worse) to transform it into a word of more than equivocal sense. – Allow me, also, to request, that you will be pleased to turn to Cunn’s. Ms., for the specific name of his N.Z. Persoonia which cannot (must not) be “Tora” (a most obscene word); Toru is the Native name of the Tree, and Cunningham, who had all the names either from, or corrected by, the Missionaries, – must have written it Toru. If you find it to be as I suppose, you can easily alter it; and if not, do try to change its nom. sp., for any person, however respectable, using such a word to a Native (in. enquiring after the Tree), would infallibly insure to himself anything but a good reputation. – 
I don’t know how but I seem to be peculiarly unfortunate in many of my unquestionable discoveries – and that, too in those very plants on which I set the greater value. What toil I expended upon the different Fagi – and now I find I have not one to call my own! (Yet, if Mr. Bidwell ever saw F. Menziesii growing he never saw it at “Waikare Lake” a place unvisited by him) – Apropos – did I write the name of this plant “Taivai”? – and then again my Myrsina (salicina, Hew!) which I sent to Cunn. (who, when here, named my leafy sp. Drimys axillaris!) – My Thuja (which cost me a world of diligent research, year after year), – my Calceolaria Sinclairii (discovered, vide “Journal”, while our friend Dr S. was enjoying the otium cum dig.  of the Bay of Islands). – But enough: poor Cunn. lamented in a similar strain. 
– And why, my dear Sir William, has “Gleichenia arachnoidea” – the last plant which Cunn. discovered when in the dense Kaitaia forest where he caught his “death-cold” – been altered to “G. Cunn” Hew.? – I have Cunningham’s sp. nov in my Ms., which I had from him himself; – and, also, “Lomaria polymorpha A.C.” (vide, prefatory remarks to “Filices novæ”, Tasm. Journal) for what (I believe) is now called “L. pimpinellæfolia”. Should there not (at least) be some reason assigned for altering a name given to a plant by its undoubted discoverer?
You will (I believe) find my n. sp. of Houheria to have 6-7 parted style, and anthers 30 and upwards – which may induce you to make a n. gen. of it – but, in every other respect it is a true Houheria. The bark of both species is very stringy, so much so that it is almost impossible to pluck off a branch as the bark will invariably strip down the tree almost to its very root. – Hence the bark is used for tying, &c. It, also, contains a mucilaginous demulcent substance, of some use in medicine. The Natives call this species, Houi or Whauwhi; that Houhere. Curious enough, the one, is only found towards the N., and the other towards the S. extremity of this N. Island. 
I noticed Asplenium bulbiferum with fronds 6-7 ft. in length in the dense forests neat the River Manawatu. I do not think that A. laxum (if it be a distinct sp.) is found in N.Z. – A. bulbiferum is very often met with without its young fry upon its grounds. In fact, I should rather say, that the finding of it with its little bulbs, is, of the two, the exception, not the rule. It is however, very plentiful throughout New Zealand. The forests in this district are very different from those towards the N. end of the Island, being nearly free from underwood and generally wanting the beautiful carpet of Hymenophm. and Trichomanes reniforme so common in the Northern woods. T. reniforme I have only seen once or twice and then very sparingly. 
Of the new Fern –?Gen nov. – whatever it may be, I intend to procure you better specimens by-and-bye as well as of the new yellow flowered Coprosma. 
I hope you have not lost sight of a curious Lomaria (small coalescent and pinnate sp.) which I sent you (I think) in the first lot of specimens. I had but two specimens (one of which I sent to A. Cunn.) and now I have none. I believe it to be a distinct species: it grew in beds, on the N.W. Coast, between Hokianga and Cape Maria V. D. 
When the “Flora N.Z.” shall be completed I will thank you to procure me 2 copies bound – one of which to be inter-leaved with good writing paper. Our Secretary (Mr. Coates) will discharge the amount of your Bookseller’s. 
I would much rather you could, send me your “Sp. Filicum”, “Icones plant.” and Lond. Journ. of Bot. & periodically (say quarterly or ½ yearly), direct – to the care of R. R. Cole, A.M. Wellington. – or, you might send them to the care of my Lond. Agent (now that I have one) – Dickson & Co., 12, Fenchurch Street. 
It has occurred to me, that yr. “Sp. Filicum”, might be improved (pardon such a daring thought) by adding, at the end of each genus, lists of synonyms and exclusions – something after the manner of De Candolle in his Prodr. How I should rejoice to hear that you had undertaken a Genera Plantarum with the Chars. of Orders and Genera drawn up briefly, and that, too, in our own Mother tongue – although I should not be very averse to a Latin one. I should think, well printed and perhaps in a small type, it could be done in one, or at most, in 2 vols. – or, perhaps, you might rather choose to write a Gen. – or a Sp. Muscorum. I should think either, or both, of such works would sell well. Should you not have any such vessel on the stocks, pray recommend me to some good work on Mosses and Algæ. 
I perceive you have retained the Nos. of those plants which you have published from among those which I sent you. Perhaps (to prevent confusion) it may be desirable to add the Nos. now sent to the Lot pr. Mr. Busby (or to the former lot), – commencing at the next hundred; – so that, No. 1, of the lot now sent would be 301, &c.  – 
By-the-bye I will just give you a remark (while I have it floating before me) which a gentleman high in office made to me a short while ago. He said, “I have one thing against you Botanists, and that is, your giving of Plants any one’s name: let him be ever so immoral a character or needy an adventurer, or, even a person who collects plants for sale or hire! You name those plants after him; which to me appears monstrous.” – Now, I think, this, is, in some degree, correct. I think that all persons who do so collect for “sale or hire” certainly ought not to have a single plant named after them. The Canons of Linnæus (21, 22), I would, however, observe – 
My last letter to you bore date Jan. 19/46, and I hope it safely reached you. It is now a very long time since I was honoured with a line of yours: I still, however, live in hope. 
Among the books which I received from you in January last, I find a copy of “Backhouse’s visit to the Mauritius and S. Africa”, with your handwriting within – “N. Ward, Esq., with Sir W. J. Hooker’s kind regards”. – Can you tell me where this gentleman is, for whom you intended this volume? I cannot find him out. 
And now, my dear Sir William, I must close; I have written more than I intended. Once more I hope soon to hear from you. Be sure to let me know of any No. sent, of which you may wish to have better specimens. 
And believe me,
With every respect,
Yours most sincerely,
William Colenso. 
List of Botanical Specimens put up for Sir W. J. Hooker, July 1846. – 

No. 1. a Veronica, n. sp., – herbaceous, prostrate & ascending, found in watercourses at Poukawa, Patangata, and other places near Ahuriri: flowers light sky-blue; leaves chocolate- or liver-coloured. – 
2. a Helichrysum – herbaceous ascending plant, summit of Parapara, the topmost range of Ruahine mountains. 
3. Hymenophyllum ?rarum on living trees, forests of Ruahine mountains. 
4. a Grass, from same locality. 
5. a Myosotis d—— d——. 
6. a Lomaria, ?n. sp., (a sp. near L. linearis, from same locality. 
7. a Panax (perhaps P. simplex) a small tree, 6-8 feet high, having (apparently) close affinity with P. arboreum from same place. 
8. a scrap of a Fagus Solandri in fruit; from ditto., brought for examination. 
9. Dracophyllum, ?n. sp., small elegant tree, 5-8 feet, with long diffuse branches, leaved at extremities; from ditto. 
10. a Panax which I take to be a sp. nov. & near P. anomalum: from ditto. Small tree; 7-10 feet. 
11. Uncinia, small plant of cæspitose growth – from ditto. 
12. Microtis, stout, large Perianth; from ditto. 
13. a ?Lagenophora, ?n. sp., – scarce: ditto
14. Arthropodium, small, in fruit – compare with No. 18, vide, “Journal” printed: – from sides of stream, at the base of the Ruahine range. 
15. Elegant little white-flowered plant, covering mountain top. 
16. Hymenophyllum – examine this – from woods, ditto. 
17. Asplenium, small, from Crags, Kaimatangi; 30 miles SW. from Ahuriri, inland. 
[A. lucidum]
18. Acæna, from. mountain top; perhaps a n. sp. – 
19. A very fine & quite distinct Wahlenbergia, from the mountain top: growing cæspitosely & plentifully: – unfortunately my specs. are nearly destroyed by insects!!!
20. A Viola, from ditto; compare with No. 160, “Journal”. 
21. A small wiry Grass, with large panicle of inflorescence, – from mountain, growing in tufts. 
22. A Gentian, ?montana, or a n. sp., – a handsome yellowish flowered plant, quite a garden flower, from summit of mountain – plentiful (It has flowered in my garden.)
23. ?Pentachondra ?pumila – on summit – plentiful enough, but flowers scarce – only 1 sp. detected bearing fruit. 
24. A Drapetes – scarce – growing with preceding: both prostrate. 
25. A small Umbelliferous plant, past flowg. – with preceding. 
26. What I suppose to be Forstera – the finding of which cheered me not a little – not, however, very plentiful on summit of mountain
27. A small, scarce Gramin. from ditto. 
28. A delicate white-flowered plant, perhaps an Ourisia only 1 flower seen, which was somehow lost: – I have it however, in my garden living, – from woods, nr. summit. 
29. A Coprosma – repens – small prostrate creeping shrub, – scarcely 3-4 inches high, from summit of mountain. 
30. A Veronica – somewhat like V. nivea corolla, however, not white, but pink and purple: – small shrub, only a few inches high, subprostrate, top of mountain. 
31. A white-flowered Oxalis – from top of mountain – only detected 1 specimen in flower. 
32. Acæna – see, & compare with No. 18. – from another locality – side of same mountn. range. 
33. A crimson-flowered Loranthus – parasitical on Trees, woods at base of mountain – past flowering – but ground beneath covered with fallen petals. 
34. A small Polygonum – a rambling prostrate shrub, sides of streams – base of mountain range. 
35. a Galium, from watercourses, near the Lake Rotoatara. 
36. a ?Polytrichum, from mountain woods, – sans fruit, which I much wish to find. 
37. a – rambling shrub – ditto – I don’t know what – no fl. nor fruit. 
38. Veronica – shrub 2-4 feet, near mountn. top. 
39. a diffuse shrub of Compositæ 6-8 feet, – woods ½ way up mountain. 
40. a Dracophyllum ?n. sp., low, cæspitose, prostrate, on very summit. 
41. Small grass from mountain. 
[Poa colensoi]
42. a yellow-flowered Compositæ – exposed ridges, a few hundred yards up from base of mountain. 
[Senecio lagopus]
43. a Coriaria, ?n. sp., from sides of rivers, at base of mountain – shrub, 4-5 feet, – scarce. 
44. White ?Gnaphalium – ditto – only 1 specimen: vide, Nos. 80 et 130. “Journal”. 
45. a Pittosporum, diffuse rigid shrub, 3-5 feet, woods near top of mountain: – vide, No. 64, in lot pr. Mr Busby, – 
46. a sp. of Compositæ. – shrub of low rigid growth. – with preceding. 
47. a Lycopodium – from exposed places on mountain. 
48. an Elæodendron-like shrub (but not “micranthum”) 6-8 feet, mountain thickets, halfway up. 
49. ?Helichrysum, – from top of mountain – wh. I suppose to be a distinct species – but comp. with No. 2. 
50. a Carmichælia (odorata, is a good spc. name) – a beautiful shrub: – sides of rivers base of mountains, plentiful – a handsome garden plant, covered with blossom, and filling the air with its fragrance: – 8-14 feet high, drooping – vide, leafy specimen, No. 50β in lot sent pr. Mr. Busby. 
51. a small Polygonum, barren dry beds of Rivers, &c. – 
52. Leptospermum – a fine drooping-branch tree, – sides of Rivers with No. 50. – 14-20 feet high. – 
53. a small grass – scarce. – 
54. a Composita shrub – 2-4 feet,	golden-looking leaves – growing with 48. 
55. a Celmisia, from the summit. 
56. an Umbellif plant – only 1 flowg. specimen detected, from near summit – is this Gingidium? – (perhaps there are 2 species in this lot). – 
57. a Gaultheria – a low shrub, 6-18 inches high – from near summit: certainly distinct from the B. of Islands common species – G. antipodes?. 
58. Fine Epilobium, (growing with 35,) 2 feet high, branched. at top. 
59. a curious wooly-petalled Composita, from summit of mountains: growing plentifully on the debris – prostrate and ascending. 
60. Pimelea, a shrub, 2-3 feet, mountain thickets near top. 
61. Veronica, shrub, 4-6 feet, d——	d—— 
62. Gaultheria, shrub, 2-4 feet, d—— 	d——
63. sp. of Compositæ – ?n. sp. of Brachyglottis or Haxtonia – shrub
64. Veronica – of rose-bush-like growth,– many stems from one root – 2 feet high, near top. 
65. Coprosma – shrub – 3-5 feet, with 48. 
66. Veronica – shrub – 4-5 feet, mountains thickets nr. top. 
67. “My splendid Ranunculus!” – having a scapus 2-4 ft. high, and leaves 6-8 inches broad. Unfortunately it had past flowering but I brought away roots which have done well in my garden (vide sp. 410 & 598,) – this is very distinct from “R. nivicola” – growing with preceding. 
68. a shrub, a sp. of Compositæ, of diffuse growth, 3-4 feet high, leaved only at ends of Branches – with 48. 
69. Veronica, shrub, 2-4 feet, not in flower – with 66. 
70. ?Leontodon, a fine one, though very scarce – near top. 
71. Gleichenia ?arachnoides, A.C., – growing in woods ⅓ of the ascent up mountain. – (By-the-bye, why was Cunningham’s sp. name not retained? He gave it to his plant while here in N.Z.) – this is a scrap for examinn. 
72. Scraps of Euphrasia from mountain, near top. 
73. Small Umbelliferous plant, from mountn. nr. top – comp. with No. 25. 
74. Neat looking yellow flowered Loranthus, parasitical upon Fagus woods, ½ way up. – 
75. (There is no 75)
76. Small Uncinia – woods – ditto. 
77. Umbellif. plant (only 1 sp. found, & that not in flower) perhaps ?Gingidium – near summit. 
78. a scrap of some Composit. – ditto. 
[Senecio lautus]
79. a scrap, (Rubiaceæ) ?Nertera, or ?Scophila – ditto. 
80. sp. of a Cyathea, low, arborescent – 4-5 feet stalk – woods, ½ way up. 
81. Aciphylla – but not, I think, “squarrosa” – see, its serrulate leaf – a splendid plant! scapus 3-5 feet high, – leaves brachiate around base of scap., and forming a circle of fixed bayonets 4-6 feet in diameter. I have it thriving in my garden. I believe it to be very distinct from the Coast species: from nr. top. 
82. a large Uncinia, only 2 specimens found – woods ½ way up. 
83. a Celmisia, (?grandis, W.C.) – certainly the largest yet detected in N.Z. Some being much larger than my specimens, which, also, have shrunk in drying. From exposed ridges ½ way up; &, again, near top. – I have it thriving in my garden. Its leaf somewhat resembles that of the one I discovered at Wangarei, in 1837, – and sent you in first parcel; – which, by the bye, had not been noticed (as one of my detecting) in your remarks on the different species of Celmisia in the “Boty. of the Antarctic Voyage”. 
84. a Cyperus – very common close to my house in swamps, its roots (a few of which I send you) are grubbed up and eaten by the pigs and the natives: in times of scarcity, eat the white kernel-like inner part of the same. – vide, specimens of a similar sp. formerly sent, from the North. – The Natives call this plant, Roriwaka. 
85. An Aquatic plant, with a long spiral peduncle, living entirely under water, in rapid & still waters about this neighbourhood. In the summer the surface of the waters are covered with their flowers. 
86. a Myriophyllum, with ditto in ditto. 
87. Small Juncaceous plant, sides of swamps – Ahuriri. 
88. Hydrocotyle – with preceding. 
89. Little ?Apium – with preceding. 
90. Another acquatic plant, growing with 85. – 
91. Goodenia (non “repens”?) very plentiful here – on low flats near swamps not far from sea – growing densely cæspitose. 
92. Triglochin with 88 & 89. 
93. a pretty and large-flowered, though small, didynamous plant, (a gen. nov, to N.Z. ?) – growing in deep mud, swamps, close to the River Awatoto – its only yet-observed locality. I feel anxious to know what this can be. 
94. a Pimelea, shrub, low bushes, 10-20 inches high, muddy flats nearby: – Ahuriri. 
95. Another acquatic plant – found, in river, with 85 & 90. 
96. A Veronica, from cliffs overhanging sea, Ahuriri: and sides of rivers in neighbourhood, sparingly, A very elegant shrub, the most so, I think, of the genus yet detected in N. Zealand: – 2-5, and, sometimes, 8-10 feet high; erect, not branched about base, & very bushy at top, and covered with lovely spikes of blue-purple inflorescences. 
97. a very erect species of ?Chenopodium, in general not branched, plentiful here in salt water marshes; – and low flats near the sea: a variable leaved plant (unless there are 2 species among the specimens) – from 8-20 inches high. 
98. a Rumex, erect with ditto – too common – & on sides of streams and Lakes, everywhere. 
99. a Rumex, with neat leaves, – low prostrate, rather scarce – in grassy spots near swamps – comp. with No. 116, “Journal”. 
100. a ?Hoheria, n. sp.; Tree 25-35 feet, banks of R. Makororo, near base of Ruahine mountain range. This should be Houheria, not Hoheria – Houhere being the native name, whence its gen. one. 
101. a Veronica, from Parimahu, a promontory nr. Cape Turnagain. 
102. Sp. of a Composita – shrub 6-9 feet, common on banks of rivers and marshy places near the sea from Porangahau – (sent before
103. Gnaphalium, – in grassy spots, headlands on Coast. 
104. Curious ?Diœcious grey scurfy plant, found a little above high-water mark on sandy ridges on Coast, Palliser Bay & elsewhere adjacent, – plant bushy 6-15 inches prostrate & ascending. (See, further on in parcel, for better specimens). 
105. Sp. of a Composit. shrub, 4-8 feet high common on shores near the sea –?sent before. 
[Cassinia retorta]
106. Veronica shrub, 5-7 feet, Porangahau. 
[V. salicifolia]
107. Myrtus, n. sp., shrub or small tree, much branched, branches somewhat patent, – stem obtusely angled & pitted, bark smooth, Wood excessively hard: 8-20 feet high, common in woods. – 
108. Small plant with Red drupæ (?Gunneraceæ) from a marshy spot near Te Uruti, a headland between Castle Point and Cape Palliser – only observed in that locality. – comp. with No. 246 “Journal.”
109. Fine Composit. Shrub, of diffuse growth, on rocks & crags & stony spots at Pahawa, E. Coast, & thence on to C. Palliser, – 2-5 feet high: leaves truly beautiful when fresh – sps. spoiled in drying. 
110. Houheria, n. sp., (but comp. with No. 100) elegant tree of light airy growth. – 12-25 feet, sides of rivers, – from Porangahau to Cape Palliser. – 
111. Asplenium ?n. sp., from Clefts in rocks, Cape Palliser. 
112. Asplenium from Palliser Bay, on clayey cliffs & rocks – perhaps a var. A. flabellifolium – to me it seems to differ. 
113. Galium, from Wairarapa Valley, Palliser Bay. 
114. ?Hydrocotyle, marshy spots, Pahawa, Coast. 
115. Little Compos. plant, detected growing between stones in marshy spots, near Turakirae, – S.W. head of Palliser Bay. 
116. Sp. of a Compos. (?Lactuca), a plant of erect growth, 1-3 feet high, branched towards top, at Ruamahanga, & elsewhere, inland from Palliser Bay. 
117. Sp. of a Coprosma, a small shrub of rigid growth, 2-3 feet high, growing with 113. 
118. Aspidium, with preceding. 
119. Asplenium, d—— d——
120. Eryngo, n.,sp., (now confirmed, sent before, vide, No. 12, in lot per Mr. Busby,) in several places grassy spots along the Coast, from Mataikona near Castle Point on to Palliser Bay – at this last place most plentiful. 
121. ??Hydrocotyle. (sent before) with fine fruit – vide, No. 147. per Mr. Busby – from same locality. 
122. a minute plant, gen. unknown, from marshy places, Palliser Bay. 
123. Hymenophyllum,	)  Share my scraps –
124. ?Nephrodium 	   	)  brought for
125. Aspidium	  	)  examination – from woods	
126. ?Aspidium	   	)  inland from Palliser Bay.
127. Asplenium from cliffs, Palliser Bay – compare with 112. 
128. Scrap of Podocarpus from Palliser Bay. 
129. Small white flowered plant, marshy spots, Palliser Bay. 
[Erechtites prenanthoides]
130. Small Juncus from Porangahau. 
131. Small Convolvulus, stony places, Turakirae (S.W. head of P. Bay)
132. Composit from Hills E. side of Port Nicholson perhaps 2 species or vars. – one, white one bright yellow
133. A Chenopodium-like plant, bearing crimson drupæ, clefts of rocks about Cape Palliser – prostrate & spreading. 
134. Acianthus ?rivularis or n. sp., – among fern, clayey banks, near Cape Turnagain. 
135. Little elegant Plants of  ?Marchanticæ, from dry gravelly Banks Wairarapa Valley: (originally detected in the B. of Islands in 1838). 
136. a minute plant, gen. unknown, found growing with preceding. Alchemilla arvensis (in another hand)
  136β. – ditto, from dry banks nr. the sea, Ahuriri. – 
137. ?Mazus from Porangahau: (same locality as before, No. 37, pr. Mr. Busby). 
138. Ranunculus, from Marshy spots, Wairarapa, P. Bay. R. macropus
139. Cardamine, from Wairarapa. 
140. Yellow Oxalis, from dry banks nr. the sea, Ahuriri. 
141. Coriaria, ?n. sp., from shores near Cape Palliser, shrub 1-2 feet high, much branched, with large fruit – having affinity with C. sarmentosa, from which sp., however, it is quite distinct, – C. sarmentosa, is, also, common there. – The Natives have not that fear in eating the berries of this sp., which they have in eating the fruit of C. sarmentosa. – The fruit of this sp. is about twice as large as that of C. sarmentosa. 
142. A little tufted Galium, from sandy places edge of swamps nr. sea, P. Nicholson harbour. 
143. Succulent leaved white-flowered plant, hanging pendant from wet rocky spots close to the sea at Mukamukanui, Palliser Bay; – the only locality. /Utricularia novæ zelandiæ. 
144. Fuchsia, n. sp., from woods Wairarapa Valley, – a procumbent flagelliform weak shrub, rising, however, among & over other shrubs & small trees to the height of 6-12 feet. – berries edible. – a sp. evidently between F. procumbens & F. excortica. 
145. A Gem! Little ringent Plant, – creeping among grass, – swampy places, Wairarapa Valley – leaves curiously blotched – scarce. 
146. a ditto! – ?Dichondra, or some allied gen. – with preceding – 
147. An elegant white flowered Oxalis, from among fern, Wairarapa Valley – scarce, like 145, only obsd. in one spot, – (unless No. 162 should prove to be of the same species). 
148. fine Asplenium, from clefts in rocks, Porangahau, nr. the SE head of P. Nicholson harbour. 
149. Slender creeping Yellow Oxalis, from wood, Wairarapa
150. Slender Ranunculus, marshy spots, Wairarapa. 
151. Ranunculus, growing with preceding, having a larger and different corolla, & thick root, &c. 
[R. rivularis var. major]
152. Pimelea ?virgata, or an allied sp., wood, Wairarapa, shrub 1-2 feet. 
153. Sp. of a Geranium from Wairarapa Valley, for exam. & compn. 
154. ?Melicytus, n. sp., from forest, hills, between Wareama, & the head of Wairarapa Valley; a slender shrub of loose growth, with long branches; 5-9 feet high: perhaps “longistylis” wod be a suitable sp. name for it. – See, & comp., with No. 359. 
155. Sp. of a Yell-flowered shrub, or small tree, of slender growth, 15-18 feet high, woods, Wairarapa & elsewhere, – ex. & comp. with specimens sent you in former parcels from Matapouri E. Coast, (vide, No. 422, sent Decr. /42), – (differing, however, from that shrub in growth & habit,) – and, also, with specimens sent you, obtained from woods nr. Otahuhu, head of Manakau Bay. 
156. a small Ranunculus, n. sp., from dry stony plains, head of Wairarapa Valley. 
157. a small white flowered plant, from sides of streams, Wairarapa Valley. 
158. Asplenium (?? 2 species) from a damp shaded cliff in Palliser Bay – only observed in that one spot. 
159. Clematis, ?n. sp., having affinity with C. parviflora, woods, with 154, (scarce). 
160. An Umbellif. plant from Wairarapa Valley, where it grows plentifully in the grassy plains – at first I thought it was a Smyrnium, – but its fruit (as you will see) is more like that of Angelica, although I do not think it can belong to that genus. – Flowering in Sept. & October & Nov., and fruiting in Feb. & March. – Its scent is very strong, & not disagreeable. 
161. ?Acianthus, found at last!! detected (leaf only) in 1837 in banks nr. the sea, Owae, E. Coast – which spot I often visited but, alas! in vain. – and again, (dry capsule) vide, No. 16, “Journal,” – and now, in flower, shaded damp spots, wood, with Nos. 154 & 159. 
162. a white flowered Oxalis, bank of the R. Kahumingi, near the wood whence preceding: – smaller flowers than 147, but compare. 
163. Chickweed – ?Stellaria – past flowering, same locality with preceding: I believe this sp. to be the indig. and to be distinct from S. media, which is common enough, and, I believe, introduced. – I have another sp. to notice by-and-bye, with coloured margins to its leaves. These few poor sp. were merely brought as memento’s, & for examn. – & not to send to Engd. 
164. Clematis, n. sp., low grounds nr. the Lake Rotoatara, and only there: a small plant, 4-5 feet high. 
165. Geranium, n. sp., from dry banks Ahuriri, all I have at present. 
166. Edwardsia, – from dry banks, Ahuriri, low prostrate shrub, comp. & examine, I think a n. sp. 
167. Gnaphalium, from cliffs, mouth of Mohaka River, Hawke’s Bay. 
168. Hymenophyllum, from forests near Te Wairoa, Hawke’s Bay. 
169. Minute Caryophyllous plant, – from dry banks among fern & grass, near the Lake Rotoatara. 
170. Splendid Moss, damp spots, wood, between Poverty Bay and Hawke’s Bay. 
171. Scrap of a Fern (Pteris) from same wood – for exn. 
172. Veronica, n. sp., shrub, 4-9 feet, from hills, road to Poverty Bay: leaves ciliated at base, &c: – living in garden. 
173. Gnaphalium, from Mohaka, with 167. 
174. Frondose Jungermannia (non “Phyllanthus”), from caudex of a Fern Tree, road to Runanga, – with 170. 
175. Trichomanes, from ditto ditto; differing, I think from T. venosa. 
177. Coprosma, – the sp. I pointed out to Dr Hooker, at Mr Busby’s, Bay of Islands: – this is the largest sp. of the genus I have yet seen, – 8-12, and, sometimes, 20 feet high, with a trunk 4, 5 inches, in diameter. It is the common coast plant on these shores, growing luxuriantly just above high water mark, and bearing an immense profusion of large, obcordate red berries. It sometimes grows in a procumbent prostrate manner, over rocks and stones. First noticed in Wangaruru Bay, in 1837. – Called Taupata by the Natives, who eat its fruit. 
178. Tetragoniaceæ, – from sandhills nr. Cape Turnagain – vide, No. 44, “Journal.”
179. Euphrasia, – large plant much branched at top, 2-3 feet high, bearing a profusion of flowers. Coast in grassy places, generally. Perhaps more than 1 species. 
180. A Plantago, from low marshy grounds, near Porangahau. 
181. Elegant Adiantum, differing, I think from its near ally the B. of Islands species, in its much smaller segments, &c: from woods, near Cape Turnagain. 
182. Veronica, from grassy spots nr. Pahawa, Coast. – shrub, 3-5 feet high. 
183. Pimelea, pendant from Cliff nr. Parimahu, – i.e. between “Blackhead” & Cape Turnagain. 
183. Euphorbia, for exam! – perhaps a var. of E. glauca, its leaves, however, are not “lanceolatis” – from sandhills, near Parimahu. 
184. Little Hydrocotyle from nr Pahawa – stalks and peduncles villous, styles reflexed. 
185. Triglochin, from near Oroi, bet. Pahawa & Cape Palliser. 
186. Juncus, from ditto. 
187. Veronica, from nr. Pahawa – fine shrub, 6-8 feet. 
[V. salicifolia]
188. Grass, from nr. Cape Turnagain. 
189. Hydrocotyle, 	d—— 	d——
[H. novæ-zealandiæ]
190. Galium, 	d——	d——
191. Plantago, fleshy-leaved, in deep gravel, & on stony cliffs, & in clefts of rocks, sea-side, nr Pahawa. Some larger than specimen sent. 
192. Rumex, with 185. 
193. Betrychium, from ditto, for exam!
194. Small Hydrocotyle from coast. – A sp. very near 184, styles erect, stalks & peduncles glabrous, leaves thick & more cut, &c. 
195. Small Juncaceous plant, moist bases of cliffs: – Coast. 
[Schœnus nitens]
196. Small Ranunculus with tuberous root; from marshy ground near Te Uruti, coast; poor sp., but all I have. 
197. Grass, growing in tufts – Sandhills, with 183. 
198. Juncus, di—— di——
199. Juncus, growing close to high water mark, on mud flats, near Parimahu. 
200. ?Nephrodium, from a wood, near Cape Kidnapper. 
201. Niphobolus, ?n. sp., on trees,  ditto,  ditto; certainly distinct from the B. of Islands species?
202. Grass, sandhills, Parimahu. 
203. Hydrocotyle, with remarkably long peduncle – with 108. 
204. Umbelliferous Plant, (Apium, or Petroselinum.) from nr. Cape Turnagain: common, everywhere on coast. 
205. A Melicytus, which I consider to be a different sp. from M. ramiflorus, and not M. macrophyllus; tree, 15-20 feet, woods nr. Cape Turnagain. One specimen has the petals transformed into leaves. – Miramiflorus. 
206. Pittosporum, fruit only – handsome shrub, 6-8 feet, high land, nr. Cape Kidnapper. Comp. with No. 344; and, also, with sp. No. 41, “Journal”. 
207. Veronica, shrub, from Mataikona; 3-5 feet. 
[V. salicifolia]
208. Veronica, di––––––, di––––––; 4-6 feet. 
[V. salicifolia]
209. Carmichælia ?filiformis: shrub, common in this district, 2-5, and 7 feet high, drooping, leafless. Generally low bushes, much branched at top. 
210. A Grass			)   	 	   
211. A small Juncaceous plant,	) Coast
212. A small Myriophyllum, water courses, near coast. 
213. Gnaphalium, grassy spots, high headlands, nr. Cape Kidnapper. 
214. Veronica, shrub, Mataikona; 5-9 feet. 
215. Little Oxalis from wood, nr. Cape Kidnapper. 
216. Little ?Hydrocotyle: sessile fruit, from banks of Wangaiiti R., near Cape Turnagain. 
217. Large Cercodia, 3-5 feet high, much branched near top, from woods, nr. Cape Turnagain. 
218. Dichondra, with peduncles and leaf stalks very long – in this differing from the B. of Islands plant: from rocks, Cape Palliser. 
219. Small elegant Epilobium, from dry stony places, Cape Palliser – Perhaps identical with a species already sent. 
220. Another Veronica, from Mataikona, shrub 5-7 feet. 
[V. parviflora]
221. An Epilobium, growing with 219. 
[E. junceum var. cinereum]
222. Plantago, low grounds, coast, near Oroi, with 185. 
223. Galium, di––––––   di––––––
224. ?Mazus, same as 137, gathered at a different season. 
225. Hydrocotyle, low grounds, coast, – perhaps, a var. of 203. 
226. Polygonum, small twining, prostrate shrub, banks of rivers, coast. 
227. Small Oxalis, woods, coast. 
228. Veronica, fine shrub, 10-12 feet, glen, nr. Cape Palliser. 
[V. salicifolia]
229. Hydrocotyle, low grounds, nr. “Baridy Bay”, – chart. 
230. Small weak Umbelliferous Plant, coast. 
231. Pterostylis ?Banksii – a fine plant, past flowg. – shaded wood nr. Cape Turnagain. 
232. Small Plantago, from swampy spots, nr. Cape Palliser. Compare with 222. 
[P. raoulii]
233. Shrubby ?Senecio, a diffuse rambling plant, 2-4 feet, cliffs coast. 
[S. colensoi]
234. Handsome ?Hydrocotyle with bristly fruit, ?sent before, from woods, nr. Coast. 
235. Pratia, fruit fleshy carmine & purple, – common, on river banks: this from Kairakau nr. Cape Kidnapper. 
236. A Composit. shrub of large size, 12-16 feet, glen, nr. Cape Palliser. 
237. A Juncaceous plant, wet spots coast, among stones. 
238. Epilobium, woods, coast. 
239. Lemna, from a swamp nr. Porangahau, in fruit?
240. Sp. of a rambling prostrate Edwardsia, on coast, nr. Cape Palliser; rarely found there in flower – scarcely 6 inches high. 
241. A fine glabrous Luzula, thick leaves, wet spots, nr. Cape Kidnapper. 
242. Gnaphalium, coast: comp. with 173. 
243. Melicytus, tree, 12-18 feet or more, from woods, Manawatu R. interior, comp. with 205. 
[M. ramiflorus]
244. Large Hydrocotyle, swampy places, coast. 
[H. novæ-zealandiæ]
245. A sp. of a Composit., a small shrub on banks of rivers: – perhaps a var. of 105. 
[Cassinia leptophylla]
246. Small Juncus, clefts of rocks, Cape Palliser. Clobanthes. 
247. Moss, from the ground, Cape Palliser. 
248. Hydrocotyle, villous sp., from ditto. 
249. Fern, ?Nephrodium, woods, coast. 
[N. decompositum]
250. Veronica, from coast; shrub, 4-6 feet. 
V. salicifolia]
251. ?Laurelia N. Zelandiæ, fem. specimens, bad ones: collected by a Native whom I hired for that purpose, and who detained them in his possession: – Sent before, with immature fruit, in one of the earliest lots. – I have never seen the flowers. 
252. Houheria, Tree 12-16 feet. Bank of river Porangahau, – comp. with 110. There may be 2 species or varieties in this lot. Fruiting specimens gathered by Natives (rushed in their drying and bringing). 
253. Small Cercodia, from barren hills nr. P. Nicholson. 
254. Coprosma, ?n. sp., from woods,   ditto    ditto, – shrub, 7-9 feet of erect growth, bearing fine Yellow flowers – the largest flowers of the genus I have yet seen. Unfortunately, thro the dreadful wet weather which we had, these, & several other of my best specimens got all but completely rotten. 
255. Gaultheria, from same locality with preceding shrub, 4-6 feet. 
256. ?Weinmannia, di–––– di––––, small tree, 7-12 feet, – vide, No. 131, “Journal.” – 
257. Leptospermum, di–––– ditto, small shrub, 2-3 and, in some places, 7-9 feet. 
258. Dracophyllum, ditto ditto, ditto – , 3-5 feet. 
259. Metrosideros, beautiful plant, ?n. sp., ditto ditto, 8-14 feet high, climbing. 
260. Lomaria, from ditto, compare with L. latifolia, – 
261. Lycopodium, from ditto. 
262. Uncinia, from ditto. 
263. Pteris, di––– ditto. 
264. Metrosideros, ditto, small bushy tree or shrub, 5-7 feet, no fl. nor fruit: M. ?robusta dwarfed. 
265. Fagus, dwarf tree, ditto, 10-20 feet. 
266. Polygonum, bushy shrub, ditto. 
267. procumbent spinous-leaved plant, gravelly shores of P. Nicholson harbour: ?introduced. 
268. ?Senecio, from an Islet in the harbour, with very large globular receptacle & involucrum. 
[Senecio lautus]
269. ?Haxtonia, shrub of rigid growth, 3-5 feet, Cape Palliser. 
270. a peculiar shrub of most rigid growth, prostrate on rocks and in their clefts, to which it adapts itself and fills, 2-3 feet high, coast about Cape Palliser, & elsewhere. It bears a profusion of glossy dark-green leaves, and, also, of white fruit (berries), containing 1-2 ovules; from its thorn-like (Rhamnus) growth, full of little spurs, and its extreme rigidity, a dried sp. does not represent truly the habit of the plant. It has puzzled me not a little: – perhaps it may prove to be a sp. of Myrsine. 
271. Scrap of a larger leaved Tree, or shrub, 10-12 feet high, from among the rocks at Turakirae, no fl. nor fruit. – But compare with No. 125, “Journal”. 
272. Small Composit., shores of Wairarapa Lagoon, &, also, at Cape Palliser. 
273. Composit. shrub, of rather rigid growth, 2-3 feet high, among rocks at Cape Palliser and Turakirae – comp. with No. 102. 
274. Small plant, sandy shores of Wairarapa Lagoon. 
275. Pelargonium,   ditto,   ditto, – distinct, I think, from P. clandestinum, wh. see. This sp. has, folia cordata, supra scabra subtus villosa, etc. First detected at Otahuhu, head of Manukau Bay, in 1842. 
276. ?Myriogyne, same locality. – 
277. Myrtus – perhaps a var. of M. bullata, but with leaves rotundatis obtusis, & scarcely at all blistered. Petalis venosis – a char. not represented in yr. drawing – shrub, or small Tree, 12-18 ft, woods, Wairarapa. – common there.?
278. Juncaceous plant, beds of River Ruamahanga. ) Wai-
279. ?Trophis, tree, 18-20 feet, woods,  nr. ditt 	  ) ra-
280. Little Juncaceous plant, with 278. [Scirpus sp.]) rapa   
281. Smaller Juncaceous ditto, with ditto.  	  ) Valley 
282. Aspidium, Cliffs, Palliser Bay. 
283. Another Small Juncaceous Plant, with 278. 
284. Small white flowered plant, with preceding. 
[Limosella tenuifolia]
285. Fruit & small Leaf of an Araliaceous shrub, 10-14 feet, from woods, head of the valley. – Formerly sent in flower. 
286. Pennantia, in fruit, from ditto. 
287. Fruiting specimen of Labiate Gymnosperm shrub, from ditto. – Vide, flowg. sp., No. 92 lot pr. Mr Busby. – 
288. ?Plagianthus, from same wood, tree 25-40 feet. No flowers nor fruit detected upon its branches, – but both found (at different times) on the ground beneath. – 
289. a Viscum, from same wood. 
290. a Friesia, n. sp., from same wood. A shrub or small tree, more spreading than F. racemosa. Foliis ovatis acuminatis lanceolatis re, etc., etc., – coriaceous. – 
291. a Micromeria, ?n. sp., or a marked var. of M. Cunninghamii, this being a much larger plant than that, from bed of Ruamahanga River. Pedicels short, pubescent, leaves cordate crenulate toothed villous beneath, &c. – 
292. a Little plant found growing with preceding. 
293. a long leaved Celmisia, from hills, head of R. Manawatu. 
294. Metrosideros pendens (Ms.W.C.) from woods, rather common, but seldom to be detected in flower. Vide, No. 22, “Journal”. 
295. Small ?Polygonum, pink-flowered, from banks of Ruamahanga River. 
[Polygonum plebeium]
296. Oxalis, from woods nr. R. Manawatu. 
297. Urtica ?ferox, a shrubby plant, or shrub of diffuse growth, 5-6 feet high, woods, nr. Manawatu. Also, detected at Port Nicholson & near Porangahau, on Coast. – but scarce. 
298. Ranunculus, ?n. sp., banks of a River near R. Manawatu. 
299. Hymenophyllum ?flexuosum, woods nr. Ditto. 
300. Hymenophyllum (if a n. sp., præmorsum) – I think it is distinct from H. Tunbridgense. I have but one frond in fruit which I send. From woods between Wairarapa & Manawatu River. 
301. Small Juncaceous plant, from sides of a small stream near R. Manawatu. 
302. Hydrocotyle, with echinated fruit, from woods at Te Hawera, between Wairarapa & Manawatu. – 
303. Little plant from stream near ditto: sent before. 
304. ?Mazus, from dense forests nr. Manawatu; (comp. with 137 and 224). – These forming a dense bed, but only in one spot. 
305. Specimens (in leaf only) of a Pennantia from Te Hawera, Branches, pedicles & nerves of leaves villous: small tree, 15-25 feet, – not in fl. nor fr. 
306. Grass from ditto. 
307. Dianella, from a wood, nr. R. Manawatu. Fruit large, of a most beautiful ultramarine blue running into purple. 
308. Little plant from Water Course, ditto. 
309. Earina but not mucronata, – I have already sent you this more than once, & you, (in Your Letter to me,) called it “E. mucronata.” – Vide, No. 28 (etc.) in lot sent in July 1841. – From woods, nr. Manawatu. 
310. ?Cercodia, from grassy spots, head of Wairarapa Valley. 
311. Long filiform ?Carex, with ditto. 
312. Filiform Carmichælia, – near same locality. 
313. Fine Gleichenia, from forest near Te Hawera; – distinct, I think, from G. arachnidea. 
314. Tmesipteris, same woods. 
315. Polytrichum, one at last! in fruit, and only one, which I send you: – same wet woods. 
316. Lindsæa, 	di——	di——	 – Scrap for exn. 
317. Dicksonia, 	di——	di——	 – Scrap for exn. 
318. Todea, 	di——	di——, 	comp. with T. superba, from which I think it is distinct; for exn. 
319. ?Opercularia, grassy spots, head of Wairarapa Valley. 
320. Gaultheria, shrub, 2-4 ft., with ditto, no flowers nor fruit. 
321. Pteris, – from dense woods, with 313, &c, gathered for examin., – in doubt of its being P. Brunoniana. 
322. Fern – comp. with Polypodium viscidum – growing with precedg. 
323. Lycopodium, from same forests, found in ground having fallen from trees. 
324. Hymenophyllum, from ditto for examn. – 
[H. pulcherrimum]
325. Do—— 		di——
[H. bivalve]
326. Do——		di——
[H. australe]
327. Do——	(a sp. bet. Hymenophm. & Trichomanes.)
[H. multifidum]
328. Do——    beautifully silky & shining when living. 
[H. flabellatum]
329. Lycopodium, found growing with 319. 
[L. laterale]
330. Lomaria, from same woods: comp. with No. 6, and, also, with L. linearis. – perhaps a n. sp. – 
331. Lomaria – perhaps L. nigra: from same woods. 
332. Umbellif. Plant, with 319. 
333. Coprosma, from wood, head of Wairarapa Valley: slender tree, 5-7 feet. 
334. Veronica, shrub 8-12 feet, banks of River near Te Hawera. 
335. A plant about which I interested myself not a little: – and, at last, succeeded in getting both flowers & fruit, after long & diligent search. I regret to have to add, that my specimens got all but ruined with the heavy & continued rain (of 14 days) which we had patiently to endure. Slender Tree, 15-25 feet, few branches, leaved at extremities; leaves in young plants ternate; whole plant aromatic. Araliaceæ. Woods, with 313. 
336. an Alseuosmia!  which I rejoiced to find, supposing, from my never having seen a single plant throughout the district, that they were confined to the Northn. parts of the Island. – I only, however, found 2 plants, with large fruit. Woods, with preceding. 
337. Wiry Juncaceous plant, sides of streams, same forests. 
338. a prize! Would I had better & more specimens!! – A Tree Fern, certainly not Cyathea, nor Hemitelia, perhaps to be the type of a new genus. Caudex, 6-12 feet, same forests: – gathered in dreadful weather, – stipes, 8-12 inches, frond 4-6 feet, lanceolate. 
339. Uncinia, from same forests. 
340. Umbellif. plant, head of Wairarapa Valley: – (sent before)
341. Leucopogon, perhaps a n. sp., from woods, near the head of the Manawatu R. – Very slender tree, 6-8 feet: much more so than L. fasciculatus. 
342. Astelia, same locality as preceding. 
343. Gentian, from grassy spots, near ditto. 
344. Pittosporum, fine shrub, 10-15 feet high, well-branched, from River Waiohingaanga, Hawke’s Bay: – comp. with No. 206. 
345. Carmichælia, shrub, side of a mountain torrent, near the river Mohaka, road to Tarawera, – (i.e. between Hawke’s Bay and Taupo). 
346. Viscum from Tarawera. 
347. Lycopodium, from ditto. 
348. Fine Gaultheria, n. sp., from ditto: growing in sides of cliffs overhanging River – shrub, diffuse, 2-3 feet. 
349. a Panax, from woods near Tarawera. A small rigid tree, of 5-7 feet. I think it is distinct from P. anomalum. Its leaves are different, obovate – spathulate. Branches much more smooth, and Fruit single & flat. 
350. a lovely Gentian, plains banks of Mohaka River; only 2 specimens detected: comp. with 343. 
351. ?Cercodia, grassy spots, near Mohaka R. 
352. Scrap of a Dicksonia, from woods, near ditto. – for exn. – 
353. Dracophyllum, from plains near Tarawera; a short leaved species – rigid branchy bush, 2, 3, & 4 feet. – Comp. with No. 106, in lot sent pr. Mr. Busby. 
354. Lomaria, from Tarawera
[L. alpina]
355. Lomaria,   ditto: perhaps smallr. var. of preceding. 
356. Lomaria,   ditto, – compare with L. deltoides, & L. latifolia. 
357. Composit. shrubby Herb, cliffs, nr. R. Waiohingaanga. 
358. Small Cercodia, from top of Mountain range (Titiokura) road to Tarawera: comp. with 351. 
359. ?Melicytus from woods nr. Tarawera, shrub or small tree of very slender succulent growth, long diffuse branches – leaved at extremities, 10-16 feet high. Comp. with No. 154. 
360. Arthropodium, growing with 343. 
361. Elæocarpus, n. sp. (unless identical with No. 12, sent in July/41, and No. 10, sent in Nov. /44,) – tree, 40-50 feet or more, in woods in Wairarapa valley & given here Native name here, Pokaka. It has the same qualities as the E. Hinau; I shall have good specs. by-and-bye. – Vide, also, 413. 
362. Hypericum, grassy spots, Wairarapa Valley. 
363. Melicope ?simplex, in fruit, and a sp. with ternate leaves the only one I have seen. This must either be a distinct species from M. simplex of Cunn., and from your drawing & description in the “Icones”, or both need alteration & amendment; – for, 1stly, in this sp. the style is longer than the anthers., being about 3 lines long, and the ovary is more hairy than is represented in yr. plate, and leaves rounder, – and, I almost venture to add, that is is diœcious, but see, and Compare. From woods, Wairarapa valley. Small, slender, Tree, 8-12 feet. 
364. a minute creeping plant of matted growth, muddy banks of the River Ruamahanga. 
365. Hydrocotyle,			)     from
366. ?Ditto,			)     Wairarapa
367. ??Ditto, (same, perhaps, as 121,)	)     Valley
368. Galium, from ditto; – compare with No. 142. 
369. a little creeping ?Composit Plant, from between stones nr. Turakiræ, no fr. nor fls. – See, 115. 
370. What I believe to be female flowers of your Elæodendron micranthum which (I venture to say) may not be an Elæodendron. See its large stigma resembling that of Myrsina. A shrub, or small tree, 6-9 feet, woods, near Manawatu River: flowers & fruit very scarce. 
371. Euphrasia, fine bushy plant, nr. Manawatu – 2-3½ feet. 
[E. cuneata]
372. Hymenophyllum, woods, nr. Ditto. 
373. Lichen on Fagus, 	di——,	di——
374. Jungermannia, 	d——,	d——
375. Ditto              , 	d——	d——
376. Ophioglossum, from grassy spots, nr. Porangahau. 
[O. lusitanicum]
377. Ditto,   from ditto, head of Wairarapa Valley. 
[O. lusitanicum]
378. another little Gem!  belongg. to ?Melanthaceæ. A Little Crocus-like plant, with bright yellow flowers & bulbous root, from dry banks, Ahuriri; flowering in April. 
379. another Treasure!  Sp. of a highly curious fern, nov. gen., possessing a double or treble involucre: of which, I regret to say, I have only poor specimens for you, & none left!  Arborescent, caudex 10-14 feet, much like that of Cyathea dealbata. Dense forest, road to Poverty Bay. Compare with 338. This gathered (carelessly) in August, that in March. – 
[Hemitelia smithii]
380. a Coprosma, no fl. nor fr., woods, banks of Tukituki River, Hawke’s Bay. Slender tree, or shrub, having long filiform branches, 8-10 feet high. Compare with C. arcuata, No. 339, lot sent in Dec. /42. 
381. Cardamine, large white flowers, with preceding. 
382. Hypericum, grassy spots, banks of same River. 
383. Fistulous – jointed Juncus, 5-7 feet, growing in water, from the Lake Rotoatara. – ?Sent before. 
384. Sp. of an Araliaceous shrub, 10-14 feet, woods, Tukituki River. Compare with 285. 
385. Juncus, from L. Rotoatara, 4-6 feet alt. 
386. Epilobium, from sides of same Lake. 
387. Large Ranunculus geum, low spots, grassy plains, Ahuriri. 
388. Small Ophioglossum, grassy spots, Poukawa, Ahuriri. 
389. Myriophyllum, from water course, nr. River Tukituki. 
390. Graceful little Umbellif. plant (?Hydrocotyle) with long linear leaves, growing with 385-6. 
[Crantzia lineata]
391. Curious plant (?Chara)  excessively fragile, & ill-scented, growing under water with No. 389. 
392. Chenopodium – little prostrate plant, from Tanenuiorangi, leaves chocolate-coloured. 
393. Fine Galium, watercourses, near L. Rotoatara. 
394. Fine Epilobium, with 390, 3-4 feet high: having affinity with E. pallidiflorum, but, I think, quite distinct. 
395. Polygonum, small, prostrate plant, dry stony bed of Tukituki River. 
396. Cercodia, grassy spots, nr. Te Ngaaue village, Ahuriri. 
397. Polygonum, rambling prostrate shrub, sides of R. Tukituki. 
398. Sp. of a small tree, or shrub, 6-8 feet alt., woods, on banks of R. Tukituki. From its peculiar large & fringed stigma I took it to be a Myrsine. I send all my specimens – all I could find: but compare with No. 370. 
399. Urtica, with linear-lanceolate leaves, growing with 390; 4-5 feet high, much branched towards top. 
400. Small Cercodia, grassy spots, nr. Station, Ahuriri. 
[Haloragis depressa]
401. Small Hypericum, growing with 388. 
402. Small Micromeria, growing with 388. 
403. Nasturtium yellow-flowered Cruciferous plant, growing with 390. 
  403β.  a Ditto, – a sp. from side of Wairarapa Lagoon. 
404. Small weak plant, growing with 398. 
405. Little erect yellow-flowered plant, gen. unknown, grassy spots, open down, road to Waitanoa village, Ahuriri. 
406. Erect Micromeria, with long peduncles, from grassy spots, banks of R. Tukituki. 
407. Composit. shrubby herb, from cliffs, nr. Cape Kidnapper, – compare with Nos. 233, & 357. 
[Senecio colensoi] 
408. Little Hydrocotyle-like plant, from bogs nr. house, Ahuriri; comp. with 390. 
409. ?Ourisia, specimen from plants in Garden. Detected in Jany/45, in sides of River Makaroro, base of Ruahine mountain range. – Vide, descript. in litt. Jany/46. 
410. Ranunculus, specimens from garden, same as 67. I have not spared to cut my only plant for you – its scapus, however, is very much smaller than that of mountain growth, partly owing to my cutting it before it was fully developed. – Vide, also, 598. 
411. ?Senecio, shrubby prostrate herb, from summits of high & barren hills road to Kohinurakau village, Hawke’s Bay. 
412. Polygonum, little prostrate shrub, barren stony heaths, Hawkes Bay. 
413. Elæocarpus, sp. in leaf only, from woods in this neighbourhood: – compare with 361. 
414. Pimelea, small low shrub, dry stony banks, Ahuriri. 
415. Geranium, ?n. sp., – distinct, I think, from “pilosum”, – in its leaves being 7-lobed, petals bifid & of a very different colour, &c – I send all I have; – grassy spots in this neighbourhood. 
416. Linear leaved Composit. (?Taraxacum) plentiful in grassy spots, in this neighbourhood. – Vide No. 47, “Journal”. 
417. Small Epilobium from Ruahine mountain; – from plants which have flowered in my garden. – ?n. sp. 
418. Yellow Oxalis, from dry stony banks, Ahuriri. 
419. Crucifer, – a scrap, – of a bushy growing plant, near sea, Ahuriri. Perhaps ?Lepidium. (I think I formerly sent it to you from the B. of Islands. Lepidium oleracium
420. Epilobium, fine plant		          ) from
[E. junceum var. hirtigerum]	          ) grassy spots, 
421. Ditto, densely pilose, (vide, No. 23, “Journal”) Ahuriri.
422. Cercodia, plant, rather erect, 12-20 inches: – d— d—
423. Wahlenbergia, a bushy plant, perhaps a var. of W. gracilis. 	d——	d——  a pest in my garden. 
424. Potentilla anserina. Elegant prostrate creeping Ranunculus, from mud flats, Ahuriri: – perhaps identical with No. 15 “Journal”‘ which, see, – but these are fine specimens in fruit & flower. 
425. Grass, Ahuriri. 
426. Umbellif. (?Apium) mud flats, with 424: prostrate. 
427. Gnaphalium ?involucratum, too plentiful, grassy spots, Ahuriri. 
[G. japonicum]
428. Carmichælia, from dry banks, Ahuriri (see, ante). 
429. Gnaphalium from nr. Cape Palliser, with long linear leaves, – a sp. wh has (I think) been long confound with No. 427. – I detected it, in 1837, on the Kawakawa R., Bay of Islands, & showed sps. to Cunningham (with 427.) who concluded them to be one species: from which, however, I have ever increasingly dissented. Their manner of growth & habit is so widely different, that they may be distinguished from each other some yards before you come up with them: – pray examine them. 
430. Large erect Cruciferous plant, grassy spots, Ahuriri: 2-3 feet high: same genus as 403. Nasturtium. 
431. Composita. (?Sanchus) the true N.Z. species: certainly very different from S. oleraceus, introduced, & easily distinguished at first sight. This is a large growing plant, 2-4 feet high, – stems very large & brittle; plant seldom branched. Upon the introdn. of the European sp., the Natives gave up the eating of this one for that sp., which, they say, is much less bitter. I believe they too have been long confounded; yet no Native would think of doing so. – To all practical purposes they are distinct enough. 
432. Samolus ??littoralis, – for examination: differing, I think, from S. littoralis, in its verrucose branchlets and obovate or spathulate leaves, never “linear”, &c., on mudflats, with 424. 
433. Gnaphalium, large, ascending plant, with 427. 
  433β    Ditto,		     ditto. 
434. Ranunculus, common, prostrate, ascending, ditto. 
[R. hirtus]
435. Pelargonium, n. sp., non “clandestinum”, with preceding. This sp. has, foliis cordatis scabris, petalis glabris, calycis villosis, etc, in which chars. it differs from that sp. – See, also, No. 275. 
436. Small Polygonum aviculare, of very erect habit, sometimes branched from base, which branches are first prostrate then ascending; with 424. 
437. Chenopodium, large, spreading, prostrate or ascending plant; with precedg. 
438. Composit., common about Ahuriri. 
439. Ditto, erect habit,         	ditto. 
440. Polygonum, leafless (or nearly so), dry banks, Station, Ahuriri. 
441. Fruitg. sp. of an elegant white Convolvulus (non “sepium”), from woods, climbing & covering trees with its beautiful dark green foliage and handsome pure white flowers: – ?sent before. 
442. Angelica, narrower-leaved sp. than the one published in the “Icones”, which sp. is not here: common on hills & cliffs, and banks of rivers, sometimes 3-4 feet high. – I sent you a sp. of the larger leaved var. of these parts. 
443. Lagenophora, from coast, leaves colored margined black. 
444. Coprosma, a scrap, dry beds of rivers, a prostrate shrub. 
445. Goodenia, a smaller-leaved ?var. from coast. 
446. Dichondra repens, from Wairarapa Valley, Palliser Bay. 
447. Leaves only of a splendid ?Myosotis in my garden, from base of Ruahine mountain range, which has not yet flowered. 
  447β. Smaller ?Myosotis, growing with 162. 
[D. fibrosa] 
448. Scrap of heads of ?Luzula, from coast. 
449. Scrap of a Cardamine, from ditto. 
  449β.  ditto of a Tillæa, from ditto. 
  449γ. ditto of Ditto, from dry banks, Ahuriri. 
  449δ. ditto    sundries,             ditto
  449ε. ditto of a Dicksonia, woods, Tarawera. 
 # __

Mosses, Jungermanniæ, etc
450. Moss from Ruahine mountains. 
451.           ditto
452.           ditto
453.           ditto  (?Polytrichum)
454. Jungermannia,    ditto,   epiphytical. 
455.)			)
456.)     	Lichens		)        ditto, on a living 
457.)			)       Podocarpus
458. Jungermannia	       	)
459.)
460.)	Lichens, ditto, on trees (vide, 150 “Journal”). 
461.)
462. Moss from bet. stones, banks of River Makororo. 
463. Lichen, growing horizontally on trees., – patent, – & obs ? in woods near Wairarapa. 
464. – 
465. – 
466. – 
467. – 
468. – 
469. – 
470. Moss, & Jungermannia, from a bog, head of Wairarapa Valley. 
471. Fresh-water Alga, from forest, between Wairarapa & Te Hawera village. 
472. Moss, from stream, with precedg. 
473. Jungermannia, on wet decayed logs, ditto. 
474. Moss,                      ditto,                 ditto. 
475. Moss, from low clayey Banks of a Stream nr. R. Manawatu. 
476. Moss, 	epiphytic on top branches of a tree lately fallen, – 
477. Lichen,	with 471. 
478. Jungermannia, on living Trees, same forest. 
479. Jungermannia (?Non “Phyllanthus”) on fern-tree same wood: comp. with No. 174. 
480. Moss, on Myrtus (No. 107), – from same wood with 296. 
481. Moss,		ditto    ditto, on ground
482.)  Jungermannia  	ditto    ditto, on twigs       
483.)	
484. Moss, long filiform species, with Jungeræ. & Lichens, from ditto. 
485. Alga (fresh water) – with 471. 
 
486. a scrap!                      Ditto
487. Alga, sides of a stream nr. Cape Turnagain. 
488. Creeping ?Jungermannia,      from ditto   ditto. 
489. Lichens, face of rocks, bet. Pahawa & Oroi, Coast. 
490. Scraps.           wet spots,     Coast
491. Splendid Moss, ground, wet woods, nr. R. Manawatu. 
492. Small Horizontal growg. woody Lichen, on Trees, ditto: – soft when wet. 
493. Shining moss, on trees, ditto – no fruit!
494. Lichen, pendent from Fagus Solandri, with 491. 
495. Scrap of Jungermannia,     di——		di——
496. Fine moss from Podocarpus woods, on R. Ruamahanga. 
497. Fruit of a Pratia, from banks of R. Manawatu: Leaves small & sharply serrate, stems spotted, Petals, diverging. 
498. Woody Fungus, on living trees, woods nr. Manawatu. 
499. Elegant Moss, sides of watercourses, same forest with 471. 
500. 2 Mosses without fructif?, larger 500, smaller 500β. clayey banks of R. Manawatu. 
501. linear-fronded Jungermannia, wet woods. 
502. ?Marchantia,	)   from clayey banks of R. Manawatu; 
  502β.  Small moss	)  most beautiful object when living.
       with ditto	)	 
 503. Moss, from wet dripping clayey cliffs, same River. 
504. Lichen, on living Melicytus, woods, banks of same River. 
505. Ditto,	
506. frondose Jungermannia, on decayed logs, same forest with 471. 
507. ?Jungermannia, on ditto, from ditto, – growing densely cæspitose, a truly lovely sight – no fruit!
508. ?Jungermannia, very thickly pendulous from trees, ditto, – another lovely object. 
509. Superb Moss, same wood – only 2 fronds detected bearing immature fruit which I enclose. 
510. a Splendid Jungermannia, pendulous from Trees, same wood. 
511. a fine terrestrial Moss, same wood: – (sent before, I think). 
512. ano’ fine terrestrial Moss, from low wet spots, same woods. 
513. fresh-water Alga, on stones in watercourses, same wood. – A very fine crisp & lovely object, when living. 
514. Lovely & fine Moss, on stones, in brook, ditto ditto. 
515. Trichomanes, on Fern Trees, same wood. 
516. Lichen, on decayed stumps, same wood. 
517. Fine Moss, on living trees, same wood. 
518. Little Lichen with large scutellæ, found upon an upper branch of a lately fallen Podocarpus, wood near Manawatu. 
519. Little Fungi (?Nidularia) terrestrial, from my garden. 
520. fine Jungermannia, on prostrate logs, woods. 
521. fine Moss, on living trees, ditto: – no fruit. 
522. Jungermannia, on decayed logs, woods. 
523. Small Lichen, on Fagus, (scarce), woods. 
524. Filiform stalked Fungi, on decayed logs; – same forest as 471. 
525. White Fungi, on decayed wood, ditto. 
526. a fine Moss, pendulous on living Trees, literally clothing & hiding the Trunks, but  without fruit. How! 
527. Frondose Jungermannia, from side of a watercourse between the villages of Tangoio  and Aropauanui, Hawke’s Bay, – a sp. very near “J. rhizobola”, but quite distinct. 
528. minute Lichen, on decayed leaves of Coriaria sarmentosa, from hills, road to Aropauanui. 
529. a delicate white fungus, pendent on decayed stipes of Hymenoph. & Fagus, in same forest with 471: most difficult to secure, falling to dust when touched, even when fresh. 
530. Scrap of a most curious and, when fresh, beautiful Fungus, discovered growing, pendent, upon a Knightia excelsa, in the dense forest near the R. Manawatu. This peculiar Fungus was large (being about 16 inches long by 7 broad and 5 deep), of a light whitish-brown colour, formed of many branches springing regularly from one short stem, all of which, with their many long pectinated segments, grew (secundem) one way. It was gathered in, and after many days of, rain, and being full of water was heavy, weighing several pounds. I tried various means to dry and preserve portions, but could not succeed. The scrap now sent conveys a most miserable idea of a once lovely object. (Sic transit!)  Native name, “Pekepekehiore”. 
531.)        Jungermannia on
532.)	Weinmannia, from woods, 
533.)	Tarawera.
534. Green Lichen, on ditto, from ditto. Comp. with 523. 
535. Jungermannia, from a wood, hills, P. Nicholson harbour. 
536. Jungermannia, on Weinmannia, weeds. 
537. Frondose Jungermannia, on wet living roots of trees, wood, in Wairarapa valley. A sp. nr. “J. flabellata”, but, I think, distinct. 
538. a Jungermannia, from same place. – 
539. a small Ditto, from ditto. 
540. a Scrap! A little white flowd. plant, & a Moss, from a bog, near the same wood. 
541. ?Jungermannia from watercourse in same wood. 
542. Lichen, from Trees, in forest, with 471. 
543. Elegant frondose Jungermannia, a sp. nr. “J. flabellata”, but, I think, distinct, – its stipe beautifully 4-5 nerved, & segments (more in no.) emarginate. From wet banks of watercourses, in great forest, with 471. 
544. Jungermannia, on logs, same forest. 
545. ?Jungermannia, on ditto          ditto. 
546. Jungermannia, peculiar woolly creeping plant, on wet logs, forest. 
547. a mite of a small frondose Jungermannia, with ciliate linear segments – all I have; I sought diligently for more but in vain: with 537 & 8. 
548. ?Alga, &c., from same spot, with preceding. 
549. ?Jungermannia, from ditto. 
550. Lichen, growing upon Edwardsia, banks of R. Tukituki. 
551. Lichen, growing with preceding. 
552. Fungi, (?Nidularia) on decayed wood, Ahuriri. 
553. Lichen & Jungermannia, on bark of a dead tree, woods nr. Tarawera. 
554. Small Jungermannia, on 	ditto, 	ditto, –  (ex. 553, for more). 
555.       Ditto                    on ditto, 	ditto. 
556. Moss,   	           on ditto,       ditto. 
557. Moss, on living Trees, wood, hills, nr. Tarawera. 
558. Lichen, on logs, woods, road to Poverty Bay. 
559. Curious ?Jungermannia, on ground, – with 154. 
560. Peculiar little Lichen, on ground, shaded banks, among Pteris esculenta, hills, nr. Castlepoint. 
561. Fungi from garden, Ahuriri. 
562. Curious frondose Jungermannia, a sp. very near “J. Hymenophyllum”, but differing in its having stipulate-like appendages, &c., – from clayey Banks, head of R. Manawatu. 
563. Crimson coloured Fungi from woods. – 
564. Very delicate Lichen from wet rocks, in R. Tunanui, dense forest, road to Poverty Bay. 
565. Moss with ditto. 
566. Moss from wet cliffs, Kairakau, Coast. 
567. Crimson red Fungi, from marshy spots, Ahuriri. 
5568. Small Moss, from open downs, nr. Te Rotoatara lake. 
  568β.  a little Grass with ditto – what?
569. Handsome Fungus, on dead wood, hills, with 154. 
570. Handsome brown Fungus, (only 1 found) open grassy spots Wairarapa valley. 
571. orange colored Lichen, on Plagianthus divaricatus, Ahuriri. 
572. Lichen,      	ditto 		with preceding. 
573. Ditto,         ditto          ditto      (& small Jungermannia)
574. Ditto,          	ditto                	ditto
575. Scrap of a Moss. 
576. Lichen, from dry banks, Ahuriri. 
577. Lichen (?Cenomyce), from ditto, 	ditto. 
578. Fine Lichen,                        d—— d——
579. an old Fungus: this is a large Fungus growing in the open down. – when new & young it is white and solid, & sometimes attains to a large size weighing 2, or even 3, pounds. Its top is covered with a No. of irregular cracks or fissures, very superficial; and as it advances towards maturity it bursts, and the whole of the former solid mass, goes away in a brown or chocolate colored powder. The Natives eat them when cooked, and use (formerly) the powder as an application to recent burns, or scalds. They call the Fungus, Pukurau. 
580. a Brownish-col’d. Lichen on pebbles,  dry banks, Ahuriri. 
581. a Greyish- 	Ditto,       d——      d——	d——
582. a Brownish-col’d. Ditto,      d——	d——	d——
583. a Lichen, from                    d——  	d——	d——
584. Jungermannia, on soil,               	d——	d——
585. Moss,              		d——	d——	d——
586. Elegant ?Marchantia,         d——	d——	d——
587. Jungermannia,      woods. 
588. ?Jungermannia, from a Tree, wood, road to Poverty Bay. 
589. Moss, &c,          from  ditto,         ditto        ditto. 
590. Fine Jungermannia, in watercourses, woods. 
591. a Scrap  ?Ditto,   (with above)          ditto. 
592. Jungermannia & ?Alga, on decaying Timber, watercourses, woods. 
593. Frondose ?Jungermannia, soil, sides of streams,    ditto. 
594. Moss, no fructif’n., on decaying timber,             ditto.                                          
Note. The last 5 Nos. got all but completely rotten, in my disastrous & wet journey of April last. 
______________________________

595. Asplenium, from shaded banks of the Tukituki River. 
  595β. Ditto, from same spot – scarce. 
596. Asplenium, from Limestone crags, village of Ngawakatatara, on the River Tukituki; this, I think, is a new species. 
[A. lucidum var. obliqum]
595. Asplenium, from ditto  ditto  ditto, – this is decidedly new, unless it may be  A. polyodon, or obliquum, of wh. sp. I am igt. 
598. Another specimen of my fine Ranunculus, just cut, from Garden, – (willing to do all I can for you) – vide, 410, & 67. 
599. Small long-leaved Triglochin, watery places, nr. Ahuriri. – 
600. Grass, shady spots, banks of rivers, forest, with 304. 
[Microlæna avenacea]
601. Ditto, (Spinifex ?sericeus) shores, nr. Cape Palliser; common. 
[S. hirsutus]
602. Ditto, sides of Rivers, with 600. 
603. ?Juncaceous plant, swamp, nr. village of Puehutai, head of R. Manawatu. 
[Eleocharis acuta]
604. Red-culmed Uncinia (a poor sp.), woods, nr. Te Hawera village. 
[U. rubra]
605. ?Juncaceous, sands, nr. high-water mk., Parimahu Bay. 
[Cladium sp.]
606. a smaller sp. of ?Hierochloe, from  Ruahine mountain range, very fragrant. 
[H. redolens]
607. a Carex-like Grass, from ditto, woods nr. summit. 
[Danthonia cunninghamii]
608. a fine grass,         from ditto,              ditto. 
[Danthonii raoulii]
609. a curious Grass, with very long nodding culms, growing on sides of Banks, & near tops of hills, & entrances of woods, in this district. The tufts are immense, nearly as large in diameter as a coach-wheel. This sp. from a wood near Cape Turnagain. The Grass, however, is scarce. Native name Hunangamoho, – expressive enough – i.e. hermit’s hiding (place). 
[Deyeuxia forsteri]
610. An Aciphylla, from Coast, gathered in Dec. /45. 
611. A Ditto, from Wairarapa valley, gathered in March/46. The Natives eat the bottom  part of the flowering stem, (both raw & cooked) and it is not bad eating – crisp as celery & very aromatic. To get it, they simply pass a running noose over the spike, &, with a sudden wrench, draw it out of its chevaux-de-fride-like bed. The mountain sp. they call Taramea, the coast sp. (these) Papaii. – 
612. minute Cyperaceous plant (?Isolepis) from wet stony spot, coast. 
613. Small Composit. of cæspitose growth, from Cape Palliser and Palliser Bay, &c., in dry gravelly & sandy spots. 
614. Small ditto,	 of ditto, dry gravelly bed of River Tukituki. 
615. Smallest ditto,         of ditto, from dry banks, nr. the Sea, Ahuriri. 
616. Uncinia, (perhaps fruit of one of those ante) from woods. 
[U. australis]
617. Leucopogon  (perhaps “Fraseri”) growing with 615. 
618. Head (Capitulum) of Acæna, (of a sp. in the parcel contg. nos 101-284, the sp. without No. & having ascending peduncles without Heads,) from grassy spots, head of Wairarapa Valley. – the plant larger than A. sanguisorba – brought for exam’n. 
619. Lot of gleanings  (scraps), – share with me. 
620. Scrap of a Pimelea (probably virgata) from wood, Wairarapa Valley, – vide, 152, ante. 
621. Sp. of a large Lomaria (all I have) from a glen, nr. Cape Kidnapper. 
622. Asplenium, clefts in rocks, & cliffs, nr. Cape Palliser: – perhaps a var. of A. flabellifolium, yet with larger and fewer involucres. 
623. Sp. of a small white-flowered plant, in boggy spots. – 
624. a curious sp.! The under-part of the Leaf of a sp. of  ?Celmisia, C. coriacea & growing on the mountains in the Middle Island, which the Natives procure, strip, and wear as ornaments in their hair!  This from a Native’s head. I am promised some specimens . – Should this prove to be a Celmisia (as, from its bearing the same Native name as that plant and from the Natives asserting the similarity, I believe it may be): – it will throw all already known far into the shade. – 
625. (one thing brings out another!) sp. of the under part of the leaf of Astelia ?Solandri, which the Natives formerly used to strip (as in sp. sent) and make into Mats for their principal Chiefs. This from cliffs, nr. Sea, River Thames. 
Algæ, &c. 

626. a Curious Alga, from Beach, Hawke’s Bay – white, when fresh. 
627. Alga, Coast. 
628. d——  d——
629. d——  d—— (?Serpula, upon this sp. first detected in Bay of Islands in 1835.)
630.)
631.)     		All found upon Beaches,
632.)		between Cape Kidnapper
633.)     		and Turakirae. – 
634.)
635.)     		All found upon Beaches,
636.)		between Cape Kidnapper
637.)     		and Turakirae – 
638.)
639.)
640.)
641.)		Algæ, &c, from beaches between
642.)		Cape Kidnapper and Turakirae,
643.)		– i.e. the SW. head of
644.)		Palliser Bay
645.)
646.)
647.)
648.)
649.)
650.)
651. adhering to clayey rocks, just below low water mark, at
652. d——	d——, 	)  Takamaitua, bet’n. Cape
653. d——	d——,	)  Turnagain & Castle Point. 
654. d——	d——,	)  just above low water mk., 				    near “Black Head”. 
______________

655. a Doodia, the first I have seen in this district, from hills nr. the sea, Ahuriri: – I think I formerly stated in a letter to you, my belief, that D. aspera & caudata (and, perhaps, Kunthiana,) were but vars. of one species, – and which I still hold – here is a sp., possessing, I think, chars. in common with all 3 – and yet differing from those which I have seen in the Bay of Islands. – These are poor specimens, & were brought me by a Native. – 
656. Small Asplenium, from Limestone crags at Ngawakatatara, on the R. Tukituki, Ahuriri – comp. with No. 17. from a similar locality. 
657. A Scrap of a Galium, from same locality with preceding. 
658. a young specimen of ? “Aspidium pennigerum”, in order that you may (if you can) detect the indusium: I still question the existence of an Indusium in this species; I have never seen one, though often sought. 
659 a Scrap of a Jungermannia, from cliffs, Ahuriri: this is a plant in esteem among the Natives, who wear it in a piece of rag around their necks, and who also put it into their oil which they use for their hair, on account of its smell. It has a very strong & peculiar, I can not say fragrant, smell, when fresh, which is not, however, disagreeable. A small portion fills a room with its odour. They call it, Kopuru. 
May my few, and poor, remarks be of some service to you,
			my very dear friends,
			And believe me
				Ever Sincerely Yours
					W. Colenso

 # 


6 August 1846
			WAITANGI, Nr. Cape Kidnapper,			N. Zealand, August 6, 1846 

To Sir William Hooker,
And Dr. Jos Hooker,
Royal Bot. Gardens,
Kew. 

The scrap of Algæ  enclosed, is a portion of a sp. I picked up yesterday on the Beach here – call it, 661. finally closed, Aug. 10/46. W.C. 

Dr. Jos. Hooker, R. N. 
&c. &c. &c. 
Kew 

My very dear friend,
In January last I received your truly kind and honorable remembrance of me – in the ix first numbers of the Antarctic Botany: – and your well-known handwriting in pencil on the first No. was one of the first things to catch my eye and to engage my attention. It was as if a necromantic spell of old had been muttered – conjuring up images of the past! Would that you had had time to have harvested this District when in these Seas – you would have added much to Science. I have worked hard in putting together my scraps for you (surely I may thus speak without fear of offending your honored father?) so as to get them off. I would rather than anything they were now in your possession; and dare to hope they will reach you in time for your “Flora Novæ Z.” – a work which, of all things, I long to devour! I have put up about 650 specimens and scraps – nearly one-half of which I venture to hope will be of some service to you, and upwards of 50 prove new. I am sorry that some of them are in no better condition. I scarce need add, you have my best. I cannot now write a long letter, for my time is much taken up – so you must e’en take the few remarks (i.e. the List of specimens in the Case) instead of an Epistle; consider my Parish of more than 2o in length – and give me credit for the desire to do more. – were I a polypus, or blessed with ubiquity, I might do better. And, when your great undertaking shall have been completed, I trust to be gladdened with a little more of your ever-welcome writing. 
In going over (cursorily) the Nos. of your “Antarctic Botany” one or two things occurred to me, which I will briefly mention: – have you altered Myrsine to Suttonia? not but that it may be quite proper to do so, but is it not better to assign the reason? the rather, too, because De Candolle (Richard’s countryman) rejects R’s. generic name as a synonym. In your “Synopsis of sp. of Celmisia”, you ?overlook a sp. which grew in my garden at Paihia, which I had brought from the high hills nr. Wangarei, and of which I had sent specimens (bad ones, I fear) to Sir William. In your Conspectus of the sp. of Dracophyllum, you name the new one which I discovered at Manukau Bay, “D. squarrosum” not recollecting, perhaps, that “squarrosum” is already the sp. name of a species – vide, Br. Prodr. p.412. I cannot (at present) agree with you in believing Aspidium venustum to be identical with A. pulcherimum: – because, among other reasons, I have never observed a caudex to A. pulcher. Nor are its fronds “coriaceous”, but flaccid and submembranaceous, nor have I met with it save in the dense forests on the higher ridges of hills – never near the sea. – I cannot speak so positively of A. Waikarense having detected this plant possessing what may be called a sub-coalescent caudex 4-8 inches high, its fronds, too, are coriaceous, and it is sometimes met with in woods lower down than the preceding, but oftener, I think, growing with it. Certainly presenting a very different appearance. I have often sought – and very often indeed gathered – specimens of Cænopteris flaccida in hopes of finding a second species, but have never yet satisfied myself, nor have I yet observed it passing gradatim into Asplenium(!) – (as Mr. Backhouse – quoted by you in your remarks upon this plant – says of Asplenium difforme, that it becomes Cænopteris odontiles) – in fact, it ever appeared to me as if the sori were let into the margin of the frond, certainly always peering out beyond it – nor should its habitat – always an epiphyte – be altogether lost sight of. I will scrutinize again, but, speaking from recollection, I do not agree with you in removing this plant back to Asplenium. “Gentiana Griesbachii” I believe to be very distinct from “G. montana” – i.e. if the specimens now sent belong to those species; as you will certainly see on comparing them together. Are not the petioles of Ranunculus macropus fistulose? And since, my dear friend, you so minutely examine your treasures – even to the filling of a 4to. page from your careful investigation and profound analysis of a scrap of anything!! – I hope you will rake all up those scraps, which some years ago I sent to Sir William. – For there are a few little things which I believe to be new; and which are still unnoticed. Among others, several Orchideæ, a Drosera (the 4th N.Z. sp.), a Cuscuta (I directed Dieffenbach to the only locality where this plant was to be found, shewing him twiggy specimens, and I heard that he afterwards gained flowers) &c. &c. In the lot now sent there are more wee things than usual – and I believe and hope they will prove prizes – to me they were gems. You will be pleased to find several of your antarctic plants among the lot: for which you are, I know, already prepared. 
I fully and cordially agree with the writer in the Lond. Jour. of Boty. who says – “We cannot but fear that great disservice is done to the cause of Botany by the prevalent mania for increasing the No. of species on insufficient grounds, &c. &c.”
And now I am going to ask you to send me a N.Z. specimen!! (if you have one to spare) of Trichomanes humile (unless you can tell me that I, too, have found it); – and, if possible, a specimen also of T. leptophyllum, alias T. strictum – but not unless you have an abundance. 
In one of the Parts of “Ant. Boty.” I have 2 sheets of Letter M. (containing Rostkovia & Luzula) if such should be wanted you know where to obtain it. 
I see, L. Reeve, your publisher, has published a “Conchologia Systematica”: – I would make a proposal to him if I knew him, and which I write down here for your consideration, and, if you approve of it, in every respect, – you can do so for me. – It is, to send him specimens of all my N.Z. Shells (from 160 to 200 species, many of which, I have not any doubt, are not only new but unique) in exchange for 2 copies of his work, one copy to have colored plates; and, also, to have 2 Copies of all plates and descriptions of such among the specimens as he may hereafter publish. I have long wished to make known some of my treasures; of many of which I think I may safely say – it will be long ere they will be found again. – 
Some of my blundering “remarks” will make you laugh heartily – but I don’t care, for I shant be there to hear you.–
I have, as you may readily suppose, a very great deal of travelling, and that over a very rough and bleak country. It is very cold here – water freezes in our Chamber, and milk in the pantry! and most of my trees and plants (even Natives, such as Corynocarpus, Myoporum, Arthropodium, &c.) have been killed with frost. The whole aspect of this end of N.Z. is so totally different from that of the other, that were you to light down here some day from a Balloon (or some other more modern conveyance) you would not recognise N.Z. From this place to Port Nicholson (240 miles, by the sinuous and rocky shores) there is not a tree to be seen, save our Coprosma retusa, and, here and there, (very scarce) one or two karaka’s (Corynocarpus) Here there are no pendant Metrosidera nor tidal Aviceniæ, as on the Bay of Islands Muddy-muddy, Hook. fil.!! I often think upon you in my lonely wanderings. I gave Dr. Sinclair an invitation, hut he is much too busy now-a-days to herborize. I propose going over the Mountains again in Dec. or Jany. (they are now looking grand being deeply covered with snow which will remain until Nov. /l when I hope to make a good use of my eyes – and you and your honored father can never be forgotten. 
If any of those few little things which I have sent to the Linnæan Society have been either described or named, I should like to know something about them: when you write let me know. – 
I am living in a house built with Typha, – which swarms with Insects such a devouring set so that I have not dared to open my Herbarium from the North. Hence, I have not a scrap at hand for comparison. 
Farewell, my dear friend, Farewell! I wish you well in every sense of the word. Ever believe me, –
Yours most sincerely,
	William Colenso. 

Mem. of plants, &c., in this parcel

661. 	Alga, Hawke’s Bay – (fragment of this enclosed in last letter). 
662. 	Lichen, on dead branches of Coriaria sarmentosa, from low grounds, Puehutai, head of Manawatu R. 
663. 	Elegant and scarce Moss, found on decaying log, in same R., higher up. 
664. 	Frondose Jungermannia, clayey banks of the R. Mangatainoka; interior. 
665. 	Moss, gravelly sides of River Tukituki. 
666. 	Polytrichum, clayey banks, dense shaded forests, near Te Hawera village, interior. 
667. 	Jungermannia, with 663. 
668. 	Ditto (and Moss without fruit) with preceding. 
669. 	Frondose Jungermannia, a truly beautiful object, – seta 1½ in., valves very long, tufted at extremities, (Had I not detected this plant in fruit, I should have supposed it to have been a fresh water Alga,) on Logs, Forest, between Te Hawera village and R. Manawatu. 
670. 	Frondose Jungermannia (and Mosses,) from clayey banks of a rivulet near Te Witi, head of Manawatu R. It is a curious fact that this species grows with its stipules uppermost!
671. 	Elegant Moss, dense forests, on roots of Fagus. 
672. 	Anthoceros, decayed logs, dense forests. 
673. 	Scrap of a ?Jungermannia, wood, banks of R. Ruamahanga, nr. heads. 
674. 	Frondose Jungermannia, decayed logs, dense forests. 
675. 	Noble ?Moss, but no fruit, same forest. 
676. 	Lichen, plains (dry & stony) head of Wairarapa Valley. 
677. 	Polytrichum, from ditto. 
678. 	Moss, from ditto. 
679. 	Small Moss & Lichen, from upper branches of Alectryon excelsum, Otawao, R. Manawatu. 
680. 	Jungermannia (or what? – it seems to have Polypodium-like clusters of sori. underneath) growing cæspitosely in dense forest, ground, nr. Te Hawera. 
681. 	Small Jungermannia, on Trees, same forest. 
682. 	Jungermannia, (?2-valved) in clayey bank of a small River, near Te Witi, interior
683. 	Moss, on ground, open spots, hills, in Fagus woods, at Mangatawainui, interior. 
684. 	Moss, on ground – found with 682. 
685. 	Elegant Jungermannia, on wet decaying logs, in dense forest, nr. Te Hawera village. 
686. 	Frondose Jungermannia, ditto,  ditto. 
687. 	Moss, from living Trees, ditto. 
688. 	Moss, on logs,   ditto. 
689. 	Moss, upper branches of a fallen tree, wood, Otawao. 
690. 	Fine Jungermannia, (no fruit) on ground, woods, near Te Witi, interior. 
691. 	Moss (?Hookeria, and perhaps distinct from H. pennata,) – from banks of R. Waipoua, head of Wairarapa valley – growing close to water’s edge. 
692. 	Elegant little Lichen, upper branch of a Weinmannia forest, head of Wairarapa Valley. 
693. 	Moss, from upper branches of a fallen tree, same forest. 
694. 	Elegant Moss, decayed logs, 
695. 	Moss, on logs, ditto. 
696. 	Curious Lichen, on living Cyathodes (No. 767), woods, head of R. Manawatu. 
697. 	Frondose Jungermannia with serrulate fronds, a scarce sp. but one which I am happy in detecting in fruit. Banks of rivulets, dense forest, nr. Te Hawera village. 
698. 	Unique erect Jungermannia, capsule 5-valved, setas scabrous, on diseased root of No. 795, banks of river, forest, between Te Hautotara and Te Witi. 
699. 	Frondose Jungermannia, nr J. phyllanthus but very distinct, on Fern Tree, head of Manawatu R. – Notice its little clasping stipules – fibres – or feet. 
700. 	2 Fronds only gathered for exam. – supposed to be Lomaria filiformis, on Trees, woods, nr Cape Kidnappers. 
701. 	Spec. of a low scrubby Edwardsia, growing plentifully on the steep cliffs in Wairarapa Bay. 
702. 	Fine Cardamine, among ferns at Cape Palliser; this is certainly a new sp., leaves stout, succulent. 
703. 	Glabrous shining ?Hydrocotyle of very cæspitose growth, wet spots, Cape Palliser. 
704. 	?Taraxacum (sent before) gravelly spots, near Cape Palliser. 
705. 	Lepidium oleraceum – a scrap for examn. leaves twice as large as the B. of Islands plant, – a shrubby rambling plant, shores, outer Coast. A.C. says “siliculis ovatis acutiusculis”, a char. not (I think) in this: – but see.    Leaves very fleshy and stinking!
706. 	Clematis, from Cape Palliser; flowers unopened. 
707. 	Ha! ha! ha! A scrap of a Cerastium, I brought this from Cape Palliser to Examn. I did not once believe this plant to be indigs., but I am now of opinion that it is really so – it is everywhere in the most retired mountain forest. The Natives, also, assert it to be a countryman. 
708. 	Sps. of a Composit. shrub (sent before) from same locality. 
709. 	Sp. of a Compos. (sent before) from bed of River, Turanganui, Palliser Bay. 
710. 	Pittosporum, in fruit, woods, Wairarapa. Tree, 25-30 feet, compare with No…., from Owae, sent in first lots. Yet, I think this has a narrower leaf, and the heads of fruit are much more dense, &c., perhaps, after all, P. eugenioides, A.C. 
711. 	Sp. of a fine bushy-headed tree (something near, and perhaps belongg. to Oleareæ 30-45 feet high, only detected sparingly in Wairarapa village; – flowers fully developed; gathered Sept. /46 – but first noticed in 1845. 
712. 	Sp. of anoth. fine tree (?Olea apetala) woods, head of Wairarapa valley, interior generally. Tree, 50 ft high; 20-25 ft. without a branch, trunk straight, even, 5-7 ft. girth. Sps. sent are fæm only; I picked up a few flowers (masc.) – 4-stamened; but have mislaid them, or got them spoiled in carrying. 
713. 	Elegant Viscum; parasit. upon next specimen (Pittosporum), banks of R. Manawatu, at Te Hautotara, Village. 
714. 	Pittosporum ?tenuifolium, – fine tree, 30-35 feet. 
715. 	Another Viscum, paras. on trees, banks of River Mangatainoka, interior. 
716. 	Filiform procumbent Carex, sides of streams, dense forest, nr Te Hawera village. 
717. 	Asplenium ?flabillifolium (differing, I think, from Bay of Islands one), from sides of ravines, head of Wairarapa valley. 
718. 	Small Hydrocotyle-like plant, growing with preceding. 
719. 	Luzula – with ditto. 
720. 	Grammitis, dense forests, mountainous interior (is this G. ciliata, or G. scolopendrina?) sporules, light green. 
721. 	Scrap of an Araliaceous plant, shrub 10-16 feet, brought from those woods for examination. 
722. 	Ophioglossum polyphyllum, n. sp., – (I hope it will bear exam.) from low grounds, River Tukituki, Hawkes Bay. Tetraphyllum, would be a good sp. name, as it generally has 4 (sometimes 5, or 3) leaves. 
723. 	A curious little plant – from dry downs, Rongoakiwa, road between Te Waipukurau and Te Witi. Growing in my garden, and just flowering only 1½ inch high; I will put in a flower or two also, in fact, 4. 
724. 	Ranunculus, wet low ground, nr “Barridy Bay”. 
725. 	Orchis (?Cyrtostylis) scarcely developed, clayey ground among fern, coast, 10 miles south of Cape Kidnappers. 
726. 	Cardamine minima, n. sp. (which I believe you will fully allow) low grounds nr sea, Hawkes Bay, nr Cape Kidnapper. 
727. 	Small white flowered plant, sides of streams (prob. sent before). 
728. 	Scrap (all I have) of some little Umbelliferous plant – from E. Coast, but I know not where. (Comp. with No. 121). 
729. 	Flowers of No. 279; flowers early August & September – always bears fruit & flowers on under-sides only of branches. Hymenanthera. 
730. 	2 spns. (all I could detect in flower) of a Ranunculus, ?spn., from nr plains, head of Wairarapa valley, Sept/4th. 
731. 	Rununculus, wet banks, plains, near Rongoakiwa, vide, of 23-24 ft. 
732. 	Notholæna ?distans, on stones nr. Cape Kidnapper. Sent to A. Cunn., in 1838. 
733. 	Curious little plant, new spn. to me, on dry gravelly spots, a little above high water mark, nr sides of Palliser Bay, only noticed there. Myosurus. 
734. 	A. Hymenophyllum with Frosted Involucre. Exam. it. On trees, woods, interior. Used by natives to scent their oil with which oil they use for their hair. It has a very strong scent, retaining it when dry. 
735. 	A Hymenophyllum (which appears to me to be new, unless it should prove H. villosum), only a few specimens met with; same locality, on living trees. 
736. 	A Ranunculus, plains nr. Otaraia, Wairarapa Valley. 
737. 	Little Carex-like plant, dry plains, with 723. 
738. 	Little Cardamine with glabrous siliqua – from near Cape Palliser. 
739. 	Viola, growing with 732. 
740. 	Orchis, sides of clayey hills, Puehutai, R. Manawatu; – only 1 in fl. – I can get more. Leaf struck me as being new. 
741. 	Trichomanes – is not this distinct from venosum? on Fern and other trees; forests. If this should not be distinct from venosum , I think your descript. requires a little alteration. 
742. 	Cardamine, from sand hills near Castlepoint, & generally on Coast, near Sea. valves of siliqua densely pilose. 
743. 	Jungermannia, among fern, ground, top of Castlepoint. 
744. 	Cardamine, large siliqua, &c, growing in tufts, common, banks of River Manawatu. 
745. 	Mem. of a shrubby plant from a wood near Puehutai, not in fl. nor fr. compared with 287 perhaps a 2nd sp. 
746. 	White flowered Gnaphalium – banks of R. Manawatu; (sent before probably). 
747. 	Little Limosella-like plant – wet plains near Patangata. Interior. 
748. 	Orchis – all I could find in fl. perhaps an Acianthus and nr. A. rivularis, among fern – interior. 
749. 	Pimelea, no fl., small shrub, dry plains – head of Wairarapa Valley. 
750. 	Small Leptospermum, shrub 2-4 feet, few branches; leaves sub-rotund, mucronate – grows with preceding. 
751. 	??Brachyglottis – shrub, or small tree, 12-16 feet, head of Ruamahanga River. Flowers not yet expanded, – is this B. rotundifolia, of Forst. ?
752. 	Scrap of an Epilobium (not in fl.) growing in tufts, and procumbent, with 749. 
753. 	Sp. of an Edwardsia, which I deem to be a n. sp., a fine elegant shrub, or small tree, 25-30 feet, exceedingly graceful, head of Wairarapa Valley, & on banks of Ruamahanga River, near head. 
754. 	Another beautiful Hymenophyllum, also with crested valves, stipes winged to base – comp. with 734, same forest. 
755. 	Fine Viscum, from a deep glen, on (?Weinmannia), near Puehutai. 
756. 	Elegant Asplenium, steep shaded sides of River Waipoua, head of Wairarapa Valley, plentiful (Comp. with 595). 
757. 	Sp. of Coprosma – C. bifoveolata, n. sp., Mss. – originally detected at the N., but not in fl. (I think sent to you already), this, from glen, with 755. – a graceful shrub, or small tree, 8-10 feet. 
758. 	Hymenophyllum (perhaps multifidum), trees, woods. 
759. 	A scrap of a Lomaria (all I have) brought from Mount. forest, to compare with descript. of Lom. discolor and now I find I have no descript. of that sp! A fine fern, fronds 3-4 feet, caudex coalescent, 6-10 inches high. sporules dark green. I send you my scrap!
760. 	A Metrosideros, – very brachiate plant, branches extending out plane, 4-6 feet, very unlike other Metrosidera, fruiting only high up topmost branches of other trees, – sps. sent from trees blown down with winds – climbing; brachiata would be a good sp. name for it. Fruit resembling that of M. diffusa. 
761. 	A pinnule (the lowermost) of an Aspidium in mountain forests, which I took for A. hispidulum. That sp. is said however to be “bipinnate, &c.” Broad, including stipita, 3-4 feet. 
762. 	A fine sp. of Polypodium grammitidis – if it is indeed that species with an elegant Jungermannia on it, from same woods. 
763. 	Lomaria n. sp. from same forests – only detected in one spot, scarce. Fruitg sp. old. Compare with Nos. 260, 354, &c. 
764. 	Sp. of a Maire – “Mida” A. Cunn., – Santalum, Hook., – a distinct sp. I think from those already known. Tree, 10-12 feet, very curly top (unlike the other N. species). Forests, head of Ruamahanga R. 
765. 	Dicksonia, arborescent, woods, 10-18 feet, closely resembling D. fibrosa. Sporules bright yellow. 
766. 	Dicksonia, (Turihunga; nom in vulg-dict.) – woods near Te Kaikokirikiri village head of Wairarapa Valley – arborescent, 5-8 feet, frond 4-5 ft, lanceolate, acuminate downwards towards base, stipita very short, 3-4 inches. Trunk even. Sporules, chrome, yellow. 
767. 	Cyathodes, n. sp. fine, graceful shrub, 8-9 feet, habit very different from C. acerosa, woods & dry hills, head of Manawatu R. 
768. 	Pittosporum, flowering specimen, small tree 10-14 feet with preceding. See. No. 710. 
  768β. Young shooting specimen of ? same plant, from woods, hills, near Kohinurakau, interior, a beautiful object. 
769. 	Clematis, and, I think, a n. sp. at least not one of those mentioned by A.C. climbing trees 10-14 feet – near Kohinurakau, comp. with No. 159. 
770. 	Sp. open arborescent Fern (?Cyathea) from dense forest, interior, between Palliser Bay & River Manawatu. – caudex, 14-24 feet, – frond, 6-9 feet, ovate lanceol. stipita, 4-6 inches, very short. 
771. 	Gnaphalium – common, everywhere on Coast, growing in dense tufts – or, rather, beds – the reason of which I have now ascertained like Radix repens. I think there are some sps. of it put up in case. 
772. 	Asplenium ?flabellatum, dry stony downs, Ahuriri, close to sea. 
773. 	Young shoots of Veronica (vide, No. 21, in lot pr. Mr Busby) to shew double alternate lines of adpressed tomentose hairs on stem from plants in garden. A beautiful sp. and thrives well under cultivation. From same locality. 
774. 	Little ?Restiaceous plant – growing with 772. comp. with 737. 
775. 	Wahlenbergia, growing with 772 – certainly not W. gracilis. 
776. 	Cardamine in fruit, believed to be identical with No. 725 – wh. see. That, gathered in August, this in October. Shores, Ahuriri. 
777. 	Small Restiaceous, plant, with No. 772. 
778. 	Ranunculus, growing cæspitosely – just gathered – grassy spots, Ahuriri. As it grows up it has more flowers on its stems. 
779. 	Cardamine, growing in tufts, with preceding. 
780. 	Little plant from dry banks, near sea shore, Hawke’s Bay, growing with Tillæa verticillaris. In the same parcel a small var. from dry plains, nr. Rongoakiwa. See also, No. 126. 
781. 	A minute plant (new to me) from low spots, nr. sea shore, Hawkes Bay. 
782. 	Hymenophyllum – surely not Tunbridgense. Trees, woods, head of Wairarapa Valley. 
783. 	Small erect Wahlenbergia, dry banks, Ahuriri, perhaps a var. of 775. 
784. 	Young state of large bushy Wahlenbergia, No. 423. This sp. grows to same size as it flowers. – growing with preceding but, I think, widely distinct. 
785. 	Coprosma ?acerosa, diœcious, – dry stony banks, Ahuriri. Berries beautiful, hyaline, tinged with sky blue, & longitudinally striped with black, size of sloes, edible (by natives), elliptic. 
786. 	Grass – ?Acæna antarctica, very common here, close to sea. 
787. 	Ditto, – on banks nr. sea, with preceeding. 
[Trisetum antarcticum]
788. 	A ––––––, Composit., common here, with foregoing – scrap with No. 47, in printed Journal. Scarcely expanded fl. too early. 
789. 	?Plagianthus divaricatus, with foregoing, bushes, 4-6 ft. 
790. 	I fell in with this in forest, and took it to be Metrosideros robusta, although its Corymbs are not terminate. I send it to you as I had it. The branches on which it flowered had been broken off & cast down with gales. 
791. 	Little Cardamine, near sea shores, Ahuriri (perhaps a var. of 726). 
792. 	A fine ditto. Clematis, growing on banks (stony & sandy) near Sea, Hawkes Bay & Coast, a low rambling shrub. Is it C. hexasepala?)
793. 	A frond of a Todea ?superba brought from forest on mountains for examn. It is a smaller plant, and I thought it was less cut than that sp. – vide 31. 
794. 	Sp. of a Leucopogon – head of Manawatu R., much more slender & graceful habit than L. fasiculatus, 8-9 feet (see, No. 341, from same locality). 
795. 	Splendid Ourisia from banks of a River, woods, between Te Hautotara & Te Witi, interior. I hope this may prove a n. species. Calyx, glabrous, segment linear, knobbed at apices, scarcely 3-nerved leaves. Elliptic Corolla, coloured purple. 
796. 	Pinnæ from an arborescent Fern Tree, 14-16 ft high, woods near Te Witi. I passed under it at sight of them & knocked them down with my long staff. We had then some distance to go: – perhaps identical with 770. 
797. 	Small Composit. plant of densely cæspitose growth, from gravelly sides of River Puehutai. This species has pilose leaves – formerly sent from Waiapu, E. Cape, (?) – vide, Nos. 29, 30, printed Journal. 
798. 	A fine grass – abundant here, – Ahuriri. 
799. 	Thelymitra? – on dry banks, nr. sea, Ahuriri. 
800. 	Moss, clayey banks of the Manawatu. 
801. 	Fine Moss, upper branch of a fallen tree, forest, head of Ruamahanga River. 
802. 	Marchantia, on ground, dry hills, Fagus woods, Mangatawainui, interior. 
803. 	Jungermannia, bog, head of Wairarapa Valley (formerly sent, from nr. Wairua, B. Islands). 
804. 	Small Moss, ground, dense forest, near Te Witi. 
805. 	Moss, (no fruit), dry plains, head of Wairarapa Valley. 
806. 	Moss, (or Mosses) damp spots, with preceding. 
807. 	Fungus, Nidularia, from under Fagus, woods, head of Ruamahanga R. 
808. 	Jungermannia, decayed logs, Forest. 
809. 	Small Moss, decaying logs, forest, nr. Te Hawera. 
810. 	Fine Moss, ground, side of glen, nr Te Hautotara. 
811. 	Small pale colored Jungermannia, ground, with preceding. 
812. 	Frondose ?Jungermannia, decayed logs, shaded forest, nr Te Hawera. 
813. 	Moss, ground, same forest. 
814. 	Fine Jung. & small moss, decayed logs, forest, between Te Hawera and the Manawatu. 
815. 	Fine Lichen, on and among Moss, dry hills, Fagus woods, with 802, on ground. 
816. 	Scrap of a Moss – from forest. 
817. 	??Jungermannia, from upper branches of Alectryon excelsum, Otawao, banks of R. Manawatu. 
818. 	Lichen from same tree. 
819. 	Splendid Lichen, from top branches of Podocarpus spicata, wood, nr Te Kaikokirikiri village, Wairarapa Valley. (Oh! for a good drawing of this – if new!)
820. 	Lichen, from same Tree.	)
821. 	Ditto, from ditto	    	)  upper branches. 
822. 	A Lichen, from shaded banks, ravine, nr above mentioned village. 
823. 	A lovely Jungermannia	ditto. 
824. 	Ditto	Ditto		ditto. 
825. 	Small ?Moss		ditto. 
826. 	Scrap of a ?Moss		ditto. 
827. 	Small Lichens		ditto. 
828. 	Moss,			ditto. 
829. 	Jungermannia		ditto. 
830. 	Ditto			ditto. 
831. 	Moss			ditto. 
832. 	Moss			ditto. 
833. 	Ditto, scrap, same perhaps as 825 ditto. 
834. 	Lichen & Moss, dry stony downs, Wairarapa Valley
835. 	Moss			ditto
836. 	Lichen,			ditto
837. 	Jungermannia, in fruit, sides of a stony gully, open downs nr. Te Kaikokirikiri village. 
838. 	Ditto	(perhaps same)			ditto
839. 	Ditto	Densely cæspitose; – beautiful sight	ditto
840. 	Jungermannia, on wet roots, wood, near ditto
841. 	Lichen, on Trees, Forest, nr. ditto. 
842. 	Moss from sandhills nr “Castlepoint”, plentiful, grown in dense patches. 
843. 	Moss, ground, Castlepoint. 
844. 	Moss, ground, Coast, near ditto. 
845. 	Moss (scrap), ground, near 	ditto. 
846. 	Moss, ground,		ditto. 
847. 	Curious fragile spreading Lichen, on sandhills nr Te Pakowai village – i.e. near “the 2 teeth.”
848. 	Moss, sandhills, with preceding. 
849. 	Lichen, dry stony downs, with 834-836. 
850. 	Elegant moss, with crested Calyptra & scabrous Set. – scarce, – noticed, however, both on logs, & on ground, dense forests. 
851. 	Moss, on pumice, nr Sea, Ahuriri. 
852. 	A scrap, found growing with 663. 
853. 	Lichen, dry stony banks, nr Sea, Ahuriri. 
854. 	Ditto, on Pumice,	ditto	ditto
855. 	Polytrichum, dry stony banks, seaside, ditto. 
856. 	Moss,	ditto		ditto
857. 	Lichen,	ditto		ditto
858. 	Ditto	ditto		ditto
859. 	Ditto	ditto		ditto
860. 	Ditto	ditto		ditto
861. 	Moss, picked up somewhere; nr Ahuriri. 
862. 	Lichen, upper branch of a fallen Tree, Forest. (Interior)
863. 	2 Frondose Lichens, 	ditto	ditto	(Interior)
864. 	Lichen,		ditto	ditto	(Interior)
865. 	Lichen, on dead Plagianthus divaricatus, Ahuriri. 
866. 	Ditto,		on ditto,		ditto
_____________________
						
Algæ

867. 	Elegant wee one from Coast nr. Cape Palliser, fruit-like male catkin of Podocarpus spicata! only 1 sp. found which I send. 
868. 	Small elegant one; from ditto. 
869. 	Zoophyte			)
870. 	Ditto			) from Hawkes Bay. 
871. 	Ditto			)	
872. 	Alga					ditto
873. 	Ditto				ditto
874. 	Ditto				ditto
875. 	Ditto				ditto
876. 	Ditto (delicate pea-green when fresh)	ditto
877. 	Ditto				ditto 
878. 	Ditto				ditto
879. 	α, β, γ. (2 parasites on same)	Hawkes Bay
880. 	Gorgeous, when fresh			ditto
881. 	Parasitical alga. 			ditto
882. 	Alga					ditto
883. 	Corallina				ditto
884. 	Alga, Palliser Bay
885. 	?Corallina, 	ditto
886. 	Alga, Hawke’s Bay. 
887. 	Small carmine colored, parasitical alga, Hawke’s Bay. 
888. 	Alga, Hawkes Bay. 
889. 	Alga, Palliser Bay. 
890. 	Ditto	ditto
891. 	Alga, Palliser Bay. 
892. 	Spongia – Hawkes Bay. 
893. 	ditto		ditto
894. 	Alga, Wairarapa (Palliser Bay) grows to a great length. 
¬¬¬¬_____________

895. 	Fungus, grassy spots, Ahuriri. 
896. 	A scrap, examine it,	ditto. 
897. 	Geranium, n. sp. (same as No. 165,) this recently gathered – I met with it in great plenty near Cape Kidnapper, low spots near the sea. Petals very fugacious. 
898. 	Flowers of little plant 723, from my garden. I happened to bring home a few roots which almost immediately sent up shoots & flowers – I send you all I have, cut off below the surface. 
899. 	?Restiaceous plant (doubtless sent before,) growing in dense tufts like Juncus, in low spots. Hawkes Bay. 
900. 	Young plant of No. 44 in lot pr Mr Busby. 
901. 	A Carex from banks of River Ngaruroro, Hawke’s Bay. 
[Scirpus americanus]
902. 	Sp. of a rambling Edwardsia, 3-4 feet high/dry stony plains nr. sea, Hawkes Bay – comp. with 166. very large bright yellow flowers. 
903. 	Some more sps. of a little ?Restiaceous plant – common on low ground. 
904. 	Sp. of a low rambling shrub, 2-3 feet high (sp. of ?Haxtonia on stony banks mouth of Tukituki River, Hawkes Bay, having long axillary inflorescence. 
905. 	Small Hydrocotyle-like plant, close to door of my gardens. 

 # 
14 September 1846

Cape Palliser (in my tent) Sept. 14/46. – 
My very dear Sir W. – I have just heard of the safe arrival of my case for you at Wellington, where it awaits the sailing of first vessel. I have just arrived at this place, travelling down the Coast – have got 2 or 3 little things for you. – I enclose a few flowers of a rigid shrub, sent you (in the case), in fruit only – I forget the No. – it bears white elliptic drupæ, and grows on the shore on these Coasts – and, I also, enclose a small sp. of a small plant found here growing on the sandhills near the Sea: and a few flowers of my new Geranium from nr. Ahuriri. These I make up in this letter to make sure of them reaching you by first oppory. – 
With Kind regards to Dr. Jos., and with every respect, believe me, 
	ever sincerely yours,
				W.C. 
 # 


22 December 1846
	
Waitangi, Hawke’s Bay
	Decr. 22 1846

J. D. Hooker Esq
&c. &c. 

My very dear friend
A little Coasting Vessel has just popped in here, bringing me word of a ship about to sail for England from Wellington, from which last mentioned place this said coaster sails this afternoon at 3. Luckily my Letter to you has been ready this some time past – had I time I could put you up a few Grasses, Algæ, &c. – I must, however, risk the enclosing a few of my smaller specimens in this packet – hoping as usual they will prove both acceptable and useful – They are not numbered (not wishing to add to weight), but will answer to following List: – 
907. Jungermannia – on wet decaying logs, in forest of Podocarpus dacrydiodes (name of the forest, Te Pakiaka), near Station, Ahuriri – an elegant sp. in fruit. 
908. Lanceolate long-leaved Ophioglossum, woods, near the village of Aropauanui, Hawke’s Bay – in all the sps. the leaf is the same, and the spike of capsules caudate & not fruited to apex. 
[O. lusitanicum]
909. a beautiful little Pratia, found in low muddy spots, but scarce, banks of R. Tangoio, H. Bay: comp. with No. 263, “Journal.”
910. a small long linear leaved (Limosella-like) plant, from water’s edge, banks of R. Aropauanui, growing cæspitosely – perhaps sent before. – 
911. Scrap of a fine Myosotis from banks of same River of which I have fine sp. for you. It sends out long running branches 2-3 feet long. 
912. a new (?) Orchis – grassy spots, near Station – of which I have plenty for you: stalks dark red, & brown, – flowers scented – pl. 10-14 in. 
913. Mazus-like plant, grassy spots, with 912. 
914. Viola (growing with 911) – this is a small sp. I have some very much larger – past flowering. 
915. Ranunculus, – deep bogs, nr. R. Tangoio – scarce. 
916. Galium, grassy spots – Aropauanui. 
917. fine Lagenophora, – hills near Aropauanui. 
[L. forsteri]
918. Moss (sent before?) – ground, same forest as 907. 
919. Carex. 			)    with 913:
[C. inversa]			)    dry plains nr. 
920. Small Restiaceous plant	)    Station.
[Zoysia pungens]
921. Large broad-leaved Ophioglossum – comp. venation with that of 908 – from grassy plains nr. Station. 
Flowers of Pittosporum (No. 206, sent in July). 
Flowers of Fuchsia with short stamens, vide, remarks. 
Epilobium, leaves passing into petals! of which I have specimens from the same plant. 
Now, my dear Hooker, I am doing all I can for you. – I hope soon to hear from you. Send me a Line now & then if only 5 words. – with kind regards to Sir William,
I am, ever and always
	Most affectionately yours
		W. Colenso In great haste. 
				
 # _______________

20 September 1847

Waitangi, Hawke’s Bay, nr. Cape
Kidnapper, Sept. 20, 1847,

Sir W. J. Hooker,
&c. &c. &c., Kew. 

My dear Sir William,
I just write you a few lines to tell you that I have this day finished putting up another small case of specimens for you, containing nearly 700 little numbered Lots; some of which I know are novelties. I have worked very hard indeed to get this ready, and it will now leave by first ship for England. You will, however, find several of the specimens now sent to be but imperfect ones, which I regret but cannot help: believe me, I have done my best – con amore. 
I have not yet heard from you. I last wrote to you in Decr. /46, and sent 2 boxes specimens in Jany/47 pr. “Ralph Bernal” which will I hope have safely arrived.  I have not time now to say more, but – as we have lately lost a vessel from England (the “Louisa Campbell”) in which were packages, &c. for me, and of which I have no account, I will just mention the last Nos., of the different Botanical works which you have so kindly remembered me with, that you may know whether any have lost or not. — 
Sp. Filicum, part iii. 
Ic. plant., part xiv, July /44. 
Lond. Journ. Bot., No. 54, June /46. 
Bot. Ant. Voyage, part xviii,
I may also, add, that I am writing to my agents, Messrs. Dixon & Co., to send me some goods and Books, and, among others, the 2nd vol. of your B. flora, unless they hear from you that such has been already sent. – 
I shall endeavor to write a note (somewhere during my approaching journey to Wellington) to Dr. Joseph your son; to whom pray present my kindest regards. 	And, with every respect,
	      Believe me,
                           My dear Sir William,
		Your obliged and attached
			William Colenso. 
 # 

21 January 1848
		
Waitangi Hawke’s Bay, 					January 21, 1848. 

My dear Sir William,
I did myself the pleasure of writing you a short note in September last, since which I have been honored with a long and kind letter from that generous and distinguished Patron of the Natural Sciences Lord Derby; enclosing a short introductory Note from yourself. I have now finished a letter to his Lordship, in which I have been obliged, sorely against the ardent desires of my soul, to acquaint him, that I fear it is not in my power to render him that service which, if it were possible, I should rejoice to do. The obstacles in great measure arise from Natural causes, which I have at some length therein detailed. And now, my dear Sir William, while I indeed grieve that I have it not in my power to aid the noble cause of Science (at least as far as the obtaining living specimens of the ornithology of this country), I have, also, prospectively to fear I shall have unintentionally offended the Noble Earl with my letter. If so, I shall be indeed sorry – but my conscience will be ever clear in the presence of the Great Searcher of Hearts, whose wonderful works in every part of His dominion, whether organic or inorganic, it has been, and ever will my delight to contemplate and, according to my ability, make known. Were you, or your Son Dr. Joseph, fully acquainted with my situation – its duties and difficulties; the all but extinction of many of the more prized genera and species of the class Aves; and my increasing infirmities, (for, non sum qualis eram), I should have, I know, in either of you a good mediator with my Lord: – but I will say no more. – 
I have said, I last wrote you in Sept. /47, – at which time I had made up a case for you and your son; which case, I am sorry to say, has not yet left N.Z., for want of an opportunity direct hence to England. During the whole of October and November (31 days) I was travelling – laid aside with severe Rheumatism for 3 weeks in Decr. (which, by the bye I caught in October, going down the Coast in the Cold Southerly Weather, and which unwelcome visitor clave closely to me during the whole of my journey), but, having to visit the Tribes living at Patea, near Taupo, and being desirous of crossing the Alpine heights of the Ruahine range, ere the summer should be too far advanced, I again sallied forth (almost against my better judgment) on the 27th Decr. and returned from that interesting tour on the 14th inst., bringing with me several new and curious treasures. These I hope to make up and send off by June next, so you may expect to have them with you about Christmas. I can scarcely venture to give you, even a rough outline of what I have now by me – although, in my eyes, many of them are prizes: – Yet I may mention – In Filices: – Gleichenia 2 sp. nov., and both belonging to the sub. gen. Eugleichenia; the one having affinity with G. rupestris the other with G. hecistophylla: – Lomaria, 2, or more species: – Asplenium, 1, or more sp.: – ?Ceterach, a n. sp.: – Grammitis, 2, or more, sp. –??Dictyopteris, 1. sp. – Gymnogramma, 1 sp. (or, possibly, a large var of “G. N.Z.”): – Cheilanthes a lovely new sp.: – Adiantum, 1, or more, sp.: – Lindsæa, 1 sp.: – Cyathea, Dicksonia, &c., sps. for examination. Compositæ, several from the mountain tops – some highly curious, and No. 77, lot pr. Mr. Busby confirmed. Ranunculi, several, some large and nr. R. nivicola but very distinct. A Geum, or Sieversia, some sps. of Umbelliferous genera. 3 new Myosotes! all small, and unlike any we have yet met with in N.Z. Plantago, a curious little sp. Epilobium, sevl. sps. possibly new. Pimelea, 2 or 3, n. sps. Loranthi, 2 sp. of, – sent before but now gorgeously flowering. Dracophyllum, 1, or 2, sps. Clematis, 2, or more sps. Carmichælia, several sps., – one growing like a Juncus (C. juncoides) another, a filiform and drooping elegant sp., – another scarcely 2 inches high (C. nana) A curious little scarlet Acæna and, perhaps, a 2nd sp. nov. Viola, 1, or 2, sp. ?Suttonia, 2 new sps. Olea, 1, or 2, n. sps. Elæocarpus, 2 sp. – my former n. sp. hence confirmed, and another now added, with gashed leaves. Coprosma, several species. Veronica, ditto. Ourisia, 1, or more, ditto. – Euphrasia, 2, or more, ditto; one, highly curious, a procumbent plant, from the very craggy summit! A new Forstera – a sp. having close affinity with F. clavigera. Some (to me) new Taxaceous plants – Dacrydium, Phyllocladus, &c. – highly curious. Drosera, 2 or 3, sps. Pittosporum, a handsome n. sp. Metrosideros, 2 or more sp. Coriaria, 2, or more, sp. Geranium, 2, or more, n. sp. of Epacrideæ, 5 or 6 sp. of the genera Cyathodes, Androstoma, Epacris, &c. Clianthus, 1 n. sp. Gaultheria, 2 or 3 sps. and of Galium, Rubus (No. 51, “Journal”, in fl. & fr) Oxalis, Cardamine, Polygonum, Wahlenbergia? Gunnera, &c. some species. Of Graminæ, several, from the mountain tops. Carices, ditto. Uncinia, several sps. of Dracæna, or Cordyline, 2, or more sps. (one of which is, perhaps, No. 82, lot pr. Mr. Busby, in fl. & fruit). Of Luzula, 2 n. sps. – one a large glabrous sp., and one a minute little fellow (L. cæspitosa). Astelia, 1, or more sp., – one, very minute sp. bearing immense fruit. A ?Chrysobactron(!!) C. Hook., Several orchideous plants, – of the genera Microtis, Thelymitra, Cyrtostylis, Caladenia, Earina, Acianthus and Pterostylis (3 or 4 sp.), – probably new species of all. Jungermannia, and Marchantia, several species of Musci, and Lichenes, a lot with sps. of Andræa, and Targionia. And of Algæ plenty. And, not to forget, the most interesting of all, some small plants from the top of the mountain, the affinities of which I cannot even guess at. Dr. Hooker will be highly delighted, I know, when he finds so many – if not identical with – very near to several of his Treasures from the Islets further South. Pray remember me most kindly to him: I wrote him briefly, from Wellington in November last. 
Hoping soon to hear from you both and daily expecting the arrival of some of your Botanical Serials – some of which I begin to fear have been lost, I am, My dear Sir William,
Ever very sincerely yours,
William Colenso,

I can yet pick up small Bot. specimens as I move along without hindrance and catch Insects and shove them into a bottle of Spirits: and, now and then, lay hands upon a shell or two – all which – Insects and Shells are awaiting an early call. 
			W.C. 

Memoranda concerning certain Botanical Specimens, 
put up for Sir. W. J. Hooker, September, 1847: – 
____________________
907. A Dracophyllum from Ruahine mountain range; same as No. 9 in last lot, but these specimens in flower: from same trees as those, & only met with in that locality. 
908. an Astelia, from dense dry woods, nr. base of Ruahine mountain range. 
909. a Lomaria, same woods, for examination. 
910. Fruiting specimens of Podocarpus ferruginea? – from same woods. The first time I have seen it in these parts – a small tree, 25-35 feet, with long diffuse branches. (In my letter to Dr. Jos. Hooker, of Nov. /46, I stated, it was not to be found in this locality). –
911. What I believe to be a new Thuja? – a small tree, 7-10 feet, on rocky ridges near summit, and very scarce, only 3 plants seen. It struck me as bearing male flowers?? and compare with Podocarpus biformis, Tab. DCLIV. 
912. A Coriaria, from nr. summit, my only sp. – I only saw one plant. 
913. Drapetes? – from nr. summit, (sent before, see No. 24, last lot). 
914. Metrosideros? – from rocky, bleak ridges, summit – no fruit, no flower, a rambling, climbing shrub, only a few inches high. 
915. Phyllocladus, from summit, exposed stony spots; small tree, 6-9 feet, compare with No. 972. 
916. a curious little plant from summit – different from anything I have yet seen in N. Zealand. I have it living in my garden. Flower unknown. 
917. a scrap of Thuja Donia? – a small tree, growing with 910 – brought for examination & comparison. 
918. Forstera? From shaded spots nr. summit; good specimens, but a scarce plant in flower: compare with No. 26, in last lot. (Don, ludicrously enough, in his Gen. Syst. Gardening & Botany, vol. iii., speaks of F. sedifolia, as having “edible leaves,” and being a shrub!)
919. a pretty little plant of cæspitose growth from nr. summit, plentifully; not in fl. or fr. 
920. Geranium, of densely cæspitose growth, open spots, nr. summit. 
921. An elegant Cheilanthes, from a shaded moist dell, wood nr. summit; only met with in that spot. I hope a n. sp. Hyp. millifolium Hook. 
922. Small Grass, from nr. summit. 
923. Veronica, from ditto, small shrub, 2-4 feet. 
924. Pittosporum, from close woods, nr. summit; such a tough shrub, & of rigid growth – comp. with No. 45 last lot; & No. 64, lot pr. Mr. Busby. 
925. Veronica, small shrub, 2-3 feet, nr. summit. 
926. Lagenophora, n. sp., growing with 921. 
927. Specimens of a shrub of rigid growth, 4-7 feet, in woods, nr. top; in fruit, but scarce. 
928. Composit. shrub of diffuse growth, 10-12 feet high, growing with 927. 
929. Gentian, plentiful on open spots beyond Ruahine mountains; compare with 988. 
930. Coprosma, n. sp., & near C. fœtidissima, bearing by far the largest fruit of any; fruit oblong, ¾ inch in length, striped green & yellow. Slender shrub of diffuse growth, 7-10 feet high; very common in Fagus woods, high up on the mountain range. 
931. Coprosma, n. sp., common in moist woods in this district, and perhaps the tallest of any, 12-18 feet; easily recognised from its unique appearance, always bearing 2 kinds of leaves – large & small. 
933. Grass, shaded spots, woods nr. summit. 
934. Euphrasia, banks of R. Makororo, base of Ruahine range. 
935. Scrap of a Hoheria for examination; small tree, 25 feet, base of Ruahine Range, western side; but comp. with No, 110, last lot. 
936. Loranthus, 2 species, one sp. in fruit (vide, Nos. 33 & 74 in last lot), from woods, base of mountain range. 
937. Viscum, trees, banks of Rivers. 
938. Small Cercodia?	ditto
939. Scrap of a Clematis, a fine plant, &c., I think a n. sp., but unfortunately neither in fruit nor flower; growing with 936. 
940. A small Lomaria, n. sp.? from Limestone cliffs, banks of river Makororo, base of Ruahine chain: scarce in fruit. 
941. A Drosera, wet shaded bank, same River. 
942. Fruiting sps. of Carmichælia odorata (Ms.) No. 50, last lot. 
943. a large leaved creeping Gnaphalium, growing with 941. 
944. Astelia, from dry Fagus woods nr. top of range: comp. with 90. 
[Astelia cunninghami] [the number on the specimen is 945, probably an error]
945. Veronica, shrub, 2-3 feet, open country, base of Tongariro. 
946. Veronica, ditto, 3-4 feet, a more erect plant than preceding, yet possibly a var. of same: from same locality. 
947. Gentian, open gravelly desert plains, where nothing else – not even a Lichen – grows: a beautiful plant. If G. bellidifolia, tab. DCXXXV, Ic. Plant., is intended for this plant – I hope this will reach you in time to do the species justice; some grow to a much larger size. From Te Onetapu, base of Tongariro. 
948. a new plant (to me) of Epacrideæ; a low prostrate shrub, yet forming pretty bushes, 1 foot high; common, base of Tongariro, 2 distinct vars. (I think) – 1 white fruited α: 1 red ditto β: fruit edible – at least I ate of it. 
949. My prize!! Elegant little Taxaceous Tree, open plains, base of Tongariro, scarce. At first I took it for a Lycopodium ( L. densum), but soon saw what it was. Some attained 4-5 feet, – These must be old, tho’ small, to bear fruit. 
950. – a Red-berried plant (Gunnera?), mossy banks of watercourse base of Tongariro. 
951. Large Gleichenia, wood, nr. ditto. ?Distinct from G. Cunningham. 
952. Pentachondra (perhaps 2 sps. ?) – base of Tongariro, common. Its fruit, which is very scarce, is a lovely object, large (for the size of the plant), pear-shaped, purple-carmine, succulent and hollow – I have procured some for you. 
953. Compositæ, new to me, growing with preceding. 
[Celmisia glandulosa]
954. Aceana, a pretty new sp.,	ditto: –	scarce. 
955. Euphrasia, small plant, large flower, slenderer & smaller than the sea-coast sp., but compare; and, also, with No. 934: dry hills, &c. – base of Tongariro: common. 
956. Thelymitra, a lovely sp. – I hope new. Only 2 specimens found, and I send both. A large flower, spotted perianth; flowering in the autumn, base of Tongariro. 
957. Epilobium, plant 2 feet high, damp spots, banks of stream, ditto. 
958. Drosera, hills, near Pareranui, near Taupo Lake; comp. with 941. It stains paper through several sheets in drying, of a carmine colour. 
959. Drosera, small, n. sp., growing with 950: comp. with 1025. 
960. A prostrate ?Podocarpus, n. sp., of straggling growth, covering the ground like moss, bearing plenty of fruit which is good eating; dry plains, base of Tongariro. 
961. A rigid Grass, with ditto. 
962. Composit., growing in dense tufts; with preceding. 
963. Veronica, base of Tongariro. 
964. ?Epacris – past flowering; small diffuse shrub, 10-15 inches high; with preceding. 
965. ?Panax. 
966. Composit. shrub, 3-4 feet: common, open plains, Taupo. 
[Cassinia vauvilliersii]
967. Pimelea, n. sp., scarce, shrub, 2-3 feet; open plains, base of Tongariro. A shrub easily mistaken for a Veronica, at a little distance. 
968. ?Androstoma, low rambling shrub, bearing red fruit; growing with 960: comp. with A. incana, Ms., No. 1007. 
969. Podocarpus nivalis? prostrate plant, forming dense bushes, dry gulley, base of Tongariro. 
970. Carmichælia, a rigid shrub, 3-4 feet; distinct from C. australis. Sides of streams, base of Tongariro. 
971. Dracophyllum, small shrub, 2-3 feet: growing with 960. 
972. a Phyllocladus, n. sp., small & elegant tree, 15-20 feet, very glaucous appearance, & scarce, sides of streams, near Rotoaira Lake, Taupo. Comp. with No. 915: and particularly with a small sp. sent you in July/41. 
973. Coriaria, small shrub, 2-2½ feet, near Rotoaira Lake, Taupo. 
974. Lichen, on bushes overhanging streams, near ditto. 
975. Composit. shrub, 3-6 feet, past flowg., sides of ravines, near ditto. 
976. Coprosma, large, diffuse, bushy shrub, 5-7 feet, d——	d——
[C. cuneata]
977. Coprosma trigyna, (Ms.) n. sp., a creeping plant, habit of C. repens, but a much larger plant, fruit scarce; open ground, Taupo. 
978. Coprosma flavovirens, (Ms.) n. sp., prostrate shrub, forming dense low bushes, 1-1½ feet high, of a yellow-green colour, berries, orange-coloured, in great plenty, and sweet, good eating. Common, on open high grounds, nr. Taupo; and at Titiokura, summit of a high range of hills, Hawke’s Bay. 
979. Pimelea sericea, (Ms.), n. sp., – scarce; shrub, 1 ft.: country between Ruahine & Taupo. 
980. Coprosma linariifolia, (Ms.), n. sp., fine shrub, or small tree, with a diffuse head, 10-12 feet high, woods nr. Patea, western base of Ruahine range. At first I took it for C. propinqua. 
[Olearia nummularifolia]  [the number on the specimen is 981, probably an error]
981. Veronica repens, (Ms.), n. sp., from rocky cliffs nr. Patea; I send you my only specimen in fruit. Flowers not seen. 
982. Another prize!! which I believe to be a Chrysobactron! and therefore venture to name it C. Hookerianum, in honour of my good friend, your very dear Son. I hope it may prove a distinct sp. I could not get any good specs., as all – everywhere – had been scorched up with fires, extending many miles. Sides of watercourses, country between Ruahine range & Taupo, plentiful. I have it flowering in my garden. 
983. a curious plant, growing with 960. (See among specimens sent in July/41, for something of this kind from nr. Kaitaia.)
[Hypolæna laterifolia]
984. Gaultheria, new to me, a small low shrub, 4-8 inches, bearing a profusion of beautiful fruit, which is good eating. Its fruit grows beneath (as it were), and in order to get it the plant must be turned up. Common on the dry heights, in the Taupo country. Native name, Koropuka. 
985. Gaultheria, ?n. sp., like the last, low & prostrate, and about the same size – but very distinct. Fruit smaller, red, and not good eating: – growing same locality. 
986. Gaultheria, shrub, 14-20 inches, near Rotoaira, Taupo. 
987. Ranunculus, n. sp., leaf only – I took this to be R. nivicola but I find it distinct. I have it however flourishing in my Garden. And send you a flg. specimen from my young plant. The severe gales of late have, I am sorry to say, almost destroyed the specimen. (in another hand, “Probably nivicola. JH”)
988. Gentian, low land nr. Taupo Lake; comp. with No. 929. 
989. Scrap of Fagus from heights; supposed to be F. Solandri when gathered, but perhaps distinct – all I have!
990. Cyathea, arborescent, from woods, Ruahine: (sent before)
991. Podocarpus nivalis? from heights, Ruahine range; low, prostrate shrub: comp with 969. 
992. a little ?Ourisia, and my only sp., – growing with 972. 
993. a little Grass, growing in dense hemispherical tufts – but not fl. nor fr. – my only sp. Common, dry plains, Taupo. 
[Those 2 last I brought as memento’s – believing I should find better hereafter: I now send them; all I have.]
994. Grass, marshy spots nr. Taupo Lake. 
995. Epilobium, dry spots near ditto: a beautiful red-leaved sp., growing in large dense bushes. 
[E. melanocaulon]
996. Epilobium, with preceding: comp with No. 27, ptd. “Journey”. 
997. Hypericum, growing near Taupo Lake. 
998. Cercodia, from banks of a River, nr. Taupo Lake. 
999. A small plant, growing with preceding. 
1000. A small Euphrasia, dry hills nr. Taupo Lake: compare with 935
1001. a small Grass – a scrap – found among sps. of 998 & 999. 
1002. Gleichenia, n. sp., near hecistophylla, but very distinct. From low ground, head of River Mohaka, nr. Taupo Lake, where it grows in a dense bed. G. Hookeriana, (Ms.) W.C. 
1003. Celmisia, n. sp., from swamps nr. Taupo Lake; and also in boggy spots nr. Patea, western base of Ruahine mountain chain. A sp. possessing a very distinct habit & appearance, from all the other N.Z. Celmisia with which I am acquainted: – never found growing in tufts, always singly. C. exilis, (Ms.), W.C. 
1004. Microtis, n. sp., side of R. Rangitaiki, Taupo Plains. 
1005. Leptospermum, elegant tree, 8-14 feet, Taupo plains; scarce. 
1006. Cyathodes, n. sp., a shrub 3-4 feet high, densely fruited, shores of Taupo Lake & elsewhere: more slender plant than C. acerosa. 
1007. Androstoma? from Taupo plains, nr. head of R. Mohaka, a small low shrub, growing among Dracophyllum, 1-2 feet high; Native name, Nohunohu. A. incana (Ms.) W.C. comp. with 968. 
1008. Pittosporum, n. sp.; P. viridum, (Ms.) W.C. from Te Kotipu wood, near head of R. Mohaka, Taupo plains. Elegant green tree, 12-16 feet high, flowers unknown. (From Te Kotipu wood.)
[P. fasciculatum]
1009. Dicksonia, n. sp., and a very peculiar one; covering the ground in the woods near Pareranui, eastern side of Taupo plains, extending for miles, never arborescent nor coalescent; growing there much like Pteris esculenta in the plains – hence I have named it unistipa: D. unistipa, (Ms.) W.C. 
1010. Veronica, a handsome narrow leaved species, small shrub, banks of rivers, Taupo plains. 
1011. Gleichenia, growing with 1008. Comp with 957. 
1012. Composit. shrub, 2-3½ feet, banks of R. Rangitaiki, and among fern, Taupo plains. 
[Cassinia vauvilliersii]
1013. Ranunculus, n. sp., from Titiokura, top of range of hills; Hawke’s Bay. Scarce. 
1014. Scrap of a Podocarpus (P. Totara?) woods in interior. 
1015. Sp. of an ?Aralaceous plant in fruit: ditto: (formerly sent)
1016. Lomaria, from wood nr. Tarawera. Distinct from “L. lanceolata” tab DCXXIX. Ic. Plant. 
1017. Panax anomalum? in fruit – nr. Tarawera. 
1018. Gaultheria, (see, No. 348 last lot) from same plant & place; I have not met with it elsewhere. 
1019. Coprosma, common in woods, Tarawera, Taupo; shrub 8-12 ft, very fetid; leaves margined, scarious; near 930, but, I think distinct. Nat. name, Kueo. 
[C. foetidissima]
1020. Something new. Red-berried slender shrub of elegant growth, 6-10 feet, banks of R. at Tarawera. At first I thought there were 2 species. 
1021. Microtis, n. sp., with a beautifully coloured perianth; only one found, nr. Taupo Lake. 
1022. Small Cercodia, banks of stream, Taupo Lake. 
1023. Small ?Hydrocotyle, d——	d——
1024. Small ??Hydrocotyle, from a swampy spot between Tongariro mountain and Patea. I shall not readily forget my gathering this pretty little plant; it was early on a bitter frosty morning when we were travelling along rather moodily (sans breakfast) and my Natives thought me mad – to gather such plants!!
1025. Drosera, growing with 1002: comp. with 959. 
1026. Wahlenbergia, from hills nr. Pareranui, common. Compare with No. 19 in last lot. Curious enough (if the same) these have always white corollas, those blue ones. 
1027. Fresh-water Alga from River, nr. Taupo. 
1028. Lomaria, from shaded glen, under Tarawera village. I almost venture to think it a n. sp. – certainly having affinity with L. deltoides, W.C. 
1029. Procumbent plant of ?Chenopodeæ, from sandy shores of Taupo Lake. 
1030. Little ?Grass, plentiful on Taupo plains, in hemispherical tufts, growth of Mniarum: not in fl. 
1031. Little plant, growing in watery places (sent before?)
1032. An Orchis, past flowering (heu!) growing with 1004. (Vide No. 161, in last lot.)
1033. Grammitis, small, linear serrated sp. (doubtless sent before under the name of G. ciliata, but see & comp.?). – terrestrial, between Taupo & Patea. 
1034. Grammatis, from woods nr. Taupo. 
1035. ?Nertera, growing with 1004
1036. Scrap of a little stunted creeping plant (habit of Coprosma repens) top of barren  (grassy) hills, road to Patea. Wish I brought more of it. 
1037. Small Labiate plant, growing with preceding. (Vide, No. 15, last lot)
1038. Coriaria, hills nr. Taupo, only 1 sp. 
1039. Hymenophyllum – examine this, perhaps agreeing with “H. villosum,” W.C.: it certainly has characters not agreeing with H. polyanthus; with which you have classed my H. villosum. 
1040. Jungermannia, woods, nr. Taupo Lake. 
1041. Polytrichum,	d——	d——
1042. Carex – growing in dense beds, nr. Mission Station, Hawke’s Bay. Native name, “Rautahi.”
1043. Good flowering specimens of my delightful C. odorata. 
1044. From wood, Titiokura: vide, 101, lot pr. Mr. Busby. 
1045. Grass, common here. 
1046. Ditto	ditto
[Deschampsia cæspitosa]
1047. Epilobium,	ditto: a large, branching species. 
1048. Fuchsia, n. sp., ditto: vide, 144 last lot. 
1049. ?Pratia, – erect sp., growing among grass, low spots, Mission Station. 
1050. Grass, – perhaps a small var. of 1046 – common here. 
[Deschampsia cæspitosa]
1051. Epilobium, erect sp., common hereabouts. 
[E. junceum var. cinereum]
1052. Epilobium, 		ditto. 
[E. junceum var. cinereum]
1053. Coprosma, from a wood nr. by; – (sent before, from Wangarei). 
1054. Umbelliferous plant: – sent before, from Bay Islands: common here. 
[Daucus brachiatus]
1055. Lagenophora, from nr. Station. 
1056. Parsonsia, from a wood hard by. Its wood is curious, I send you a sp., though old. 
1057. Stellaria, common generally. I once believed this to be an introduced plant, but I am now of opinion it is truly indigenous: – perhaps there are 2 or more species. See, on. 
1058. ?Arenaria, common hereabouts, sent before. 
1059. Microtis, – I send this to be examined, as it may prove to be a distinct species; common hereabouts. 
1060. Pteris, &, perhaps, tenuis – woods, nearby. 
1061. Lomaria, a small weak Fern, wood nearby – scarce, near lanceolata, but I think distinct. 
1062. Small Grass: – a scrap. 
1063. Grass, – common hereabouts. 
  1063β. Grass, with Fungi, (?Uredo, sp.)
1064. Drosera, from hills nr. Tangoio, Hawke’s Bay; comp. with B. Islands species. 
1065. Elegant Fern, (I scarcely dare say a Cheilanthes) from woods, Aropauanui, Hawke’s Bay. 
1066. Herbaceous Composita, 2-3 ft. high, branched at top, woods, road to Aropauanui. 
[Senecio latifolius var. rufiglandulosus]
1067. ?Hydrocotyle,		ditto. 
[Viola cunninghamii]
1068. ?Luzula, 			ditto. 
[L. campestris var. picta]
1069. Fuchsia?? I must call your attention to this; the common species, F. excorticata: in fact it precisely agrees with the drawing of Forster’s “Skinnera,” tab. 29. I have seen several trees of it, in this district, and some hundreds of flowers upon them, but never one with the stamens exserted, as in the F. excorticata, which, plant, however, is here abundantly also: I wait now to examine its ripe fruit. Perhaps, after all, only a var., but, if so, a well-marked one. Small Tree, 12-16 feet; – low grounds, sides of streams, edges of woods, Hawke’s Bay. 
1070. Cardamine, thickets; Kapemaihi, Hawke’s Bay. 
1071. Carex, bog; Tangoio village,	d——
[C. pseudocyperus]
1072. Celmisia, hills, nr. Tangoio,	d——
[C. longifolia var. gracilenta]
1073. Thelymitra, 	d——		d——
[T. longifolia]
1074. ?Cyperaceæ, a small plant, growing with 1071. 
1075. ?Cyperaceæ, a large arborescent plant, growing with preceding. This is common in all 
bogs, its trunk stands up like a pillar – 2-4 feet high, and 6-10 inches thick;
[Carex secta]
1076. Epilobium, fine plant; growing with 1071. 
[E. billardierianum]
1077. Smooth-stalked Galium, growg. with 1065. 
[G. umbrosum]
1078. Grass,		d——	d——
[Trisetum antarcticum]
1079. Elegant procumbent Polygonum, from dry banks nr. the Station; sent before, but this is a good specimen. 
1080. ?Cyperaceæ, – a plant growing in dense bushes – 2 feet in diamr. – hills, abnove Tangoio. 
[Gahnia gaudichaudi]
1081. Oxalis, dry bank, nr. Mission Station. 
1083. Small Oxalis, growing with 1070. 
[O. corniculata var. ciliifera]
1082. Oxalis		d——
1084. Pterostylis, not Banksii, with colored perianth. Growing with 1066. (Vide, No. 58. lot pr. Mr. Busby.) only one specimen detected in flower. 
1085. ?Mazus, from deep bed of River (but not under water), between Patangata and Manawarakau. 
1086. Little Carex? Mud-banks, sides of R. Ngaruroro; growing in tufts. 
[Scirpus basilaris]
1087. Little white flowered plant with preceding. 
[Limosella tenuifolia]
1088. Carex, dry plains road to Manawarakau from Patangata. 
[C. colensoi]
1089. Little Umbellif. plant from Rotoatara Lake; resembling yr. Crantzia lineata. 
1090. Little plant growing with preceding. 
[Oxalis corniculata var. ciliifera]
1091. Triglochin		ditto
1092. Hydrocotyle, swamp nr. Te Rotoatara. 
[H. Novæ-zealandiæ]
1093. Juncaceous plant banks of R. Waipoua. 
[Juncus novæ-zealandiæ]
1094. Scrap of an Epilobium, from ditto: – a young specimen, just to shew its peculiar apiculated leaf. – I sent you this before. 
1095. Young plants of leafless Clematis (No. 164 in last lot). Growing with 1092. 
1096. Gratiola? growing with preceding. 
1097. Oxalis, a sp. growing in beds, in wood with 1085, but found in flower. anon. 
[O. corniculata var. ciliifera]
1098. Polygonum, perhaps a n. sp., for a long time I passed this believing it to be P. complexum, – I think, however, it is distinct. Like that sp. it forms dense bushes; plains, hard by. 
1099. A scrap, perhaps Carpodetus serratus, or an allied sp. – I brought this bit for exam. Same wood as 1085, small tree. 
1100. Panax same wood. Perhaps a var. of P. anomalum. 
1101. Myrtus, ?pedunculata, young fruit, same wood. 
1102. Small tree, 16 feet high, same wood. 
1103. Small tree, 5-6 feet, wood nr. Te Waipukurau. 
1104. Small tree, 12 feet, laden with flowers; same wood as 1085. 
1105. Coprosma linariifolia, in fl. (fæm.) from same wood. Vide, No. 980. 
1106. Coprosma viridis, n. sp., (Ms.) W.C. from same wood, 8 feet high, nr. C. spathulata, habit of C. rhamnoides. 
1107. Elæocarpus, (my n. sp., vide, 413 last lot) not yet found in flower though common throughout the district. 
1108. Veronica, shrub, 3-5 feet, cliffs, nr. Cape Kidnapper. 
1109. Notholæna, on crags, high land, nr. 	ditto. 
1110. Senecio, large shrubby species, cliffs	ditto
1111. Alseuosmia, wood near Te Hawera, not yet found in flower (vide, No. 336, last lot, from same locality). 
1112. ?Araliaceous; same as 335 last lot, but better specimens. 
1113. Hypericum, Wairarapa valley. 
[H. japonicum]
1114. ?Gnaphalium		ditto
1115. Asplenium, rocks, nr. Cape Palliser. 
1116. Veronica, low, straggling yet pretty shrub, 2 feet, – Cape Palliser. 
[V. salicifolia]
1117. Pomaderris for examination from Castle Point, the only place I have detected it growing in the South; low plant, 6-12 inches high. 
1118. Scrap of a fruiting thyrse of a ?Cordyline, 8-10 feet high, thickets, hills, nr. E. head of Port Nicholson harbour. 
1119. Linear leaved Olea, (see, No. 711 last lot) from Hurunuiorangi village, Wairarapa valley. 
1120. Fine Leptospermum, tree, drooping handsome, 25-35 feet, growing with preceding. 
1121. Sp. in fruit of a large shrub from Turakirae, South head of Palliser Bay; – Vide No. 271, last lot. Shrub, large, spreading, 10-12 ft. 
1122. Suite of specimens of my handsome Metrosideros (vide No. 259, last lot; from same locality – i.e. as 1118.)
1123. Metrosideros, a small tree, 4-5 feet high, having affinity with M. robusta. (I sent, several years ago, perhaps in my 1st or 2nd lot) a flowg. sp. from a similar tree wh. I found nr. Ngunguru River, E. Coast, nr. Wangarei. 
1124. Scrap of a small Fagus, same hills; tree, 8-12 feet. 
1125. Small ?Veronica, procumbent, straggling, 6-9 inches high, growing near ditto, in grassy spots. 
1126. Oxalis from Te Hautotara, River Manawatu. 
1127. Hypericum		d——	d——
1128. Cyathea, woods nr. Te Hawera (sent before?)
[Hemitelia smithii]
1129. Fern, river, nr. Cape Turnagain; – somewhat like Pteris macilenta, but examine it; – a scarce plant. 
[Pteris macilenta]
1130. Grammitis, n. sp., from high forest beyond Te Hawera village. G. rufus-villosus, (Ms.) W.C. 
1131. A scrap of a dark looking, succulent & brittle fern, 4-5 feet high, perhaps Aspidium pannigerum, but apparently differing from the Northern species bearing that name); brought merely for exam. 
1132. Juncus, damp clayey hills, Wellington
  1132β. Myosotis, n. sp., wood, beyond Te Hawera: M. simplex, n. sp., W.C. 
1133. Lindsæa, n. sp., dry clayey hills, S.E. head, P. Nicholson harbour. L. australis, n. sp., (Ms.) W.C. 
1134. Microtis ?n. sp., found growing with foregoing; only 2 specimens obtained, Autumn (April) 1847. – But compare with No. 1021. 
1135. Acianthus, n. sp., detected on the E. Coast, in a gulley between Oroi, and Huariki villages nr. Cape Palliser. Autumnal species. A. foliobractus, (Ms.) W.C. Bracts large cordate bi-nerved. 
1136. See, No. 378, last lot. These from Te Hautotara. 
1137. A highly curious something; dry crags overhanging the sea, N. side of P. Nicholson harbour. 
1138. Lichen from same spot. 
1139. A little plant of  ?Junceæ, (sent before, see last lot,) from interstices between rocks, cliffs, Cook’s Straits. (“Colobanthus” in a different hand). 
1140. This I take to be the fern Lomaria lanceolata (as I have already more than once, I fear, tired you with,) – a common fern, generally in wet woods; certainly distinct from yours, tab. 429, Icones Plant. From Tarawera. 
1141. Membranaceous Fungus, elegant when fresh, woods nr. Te Ẁiti. 
1142. Small linear Lomaria, from Ruahine, Taupo, &c. (See, No. 6, in last lot). The larger sp. from Wairarapa Valley. 
1143. Moniliform fresh-water Alga from Rotoatara Lake; on Myriophyllum, &c. 
1144. Grass, Cape Palliser, growing sparingly among fern. 
[Agropyrum multiflorum]
1145. Grass,	d——,	d——	d——
[Dichelachne crinita]
1146. Grass,	d——, growing plentifully. 
1147. Juncaceæ, swamp, Tangoio village, Hawke’s Bay. [from ditto.]
[Cladium glomeratum]
1148. A good sp. of a plant formerly sent (Vide, printed “Journey”, No. 50). 
1149. ?Arundo, n. sp., on an islet in Aropauanui River, Hawke’s Bay. 
1150. Large Grass, from same River. 
[Poa anceps]
1151. Juncus, from Rotoatara Lake, in water. 
[Scirpus lacustris]
1152. ?Juncus, swampy spots, nr. R. Lake (ditto). 
1153. Grass, dry plains, nr. ditto. 
1154. Viscum, from trees, sides of Aropauanui River. 
[Tupeia antarctica]
1155. Hymenophyllum from top of Ruahine range, forming beds on the ground: unfortunately not detected in fruit: I send it with all its Jungermannia, Mosses, &c. Perhaps a n. sp. 
1156. Carmichælia nana, (Ms.) W.C., n. sp. from base of Tongariro and dry hills road thence to Patea; only 2-3 inches above ground, and immensely tough!
1157. Grass, banks of River nr. Tarawera village. 
[Asprella gracilis]
1158. Marchantia, n. sp., curious, wet banks, sides of R. Makororo. 
1159. Moss,		d——		d——
1160. Lichen, on ground, barren hills, western base of Ruahines. 
1161. Lichen,	d——	d——	d——	d——
1162. Moss, in a watercourse, Fagus woods, nr. summit of Ruahine: only 1 fruiting sp. 
1163. Long tape-like Marchantia, growing with 1158. 
1164. Lichen, on stones, on the peak of Ruahine range. 
1165. Moss, growing with 1158: 2 kinds?
1166. Sundries, in particular an elegant filiform Jungermannia, – from top of Ruahine. 
1167. Lichen, growing with 1160. 
1168. Lichen, 	d——
1169. Lichen, (?Stereocaulon,) ditto
1170. Lichen, ground, nr. summit of Ruahine range. 
1171. Lichen, (?Cenomyces) ditto: beautiful. 
1172. Lichen, ground, with 1160. 
1173. Lichen, ditto		ditto
1174. Lichen, on stones,	ditto
1175. Lichen, from Fagus forests, Ruahine ranges, just carpeting those lovely upper rooms of Nature: some patches 2 feet sq.! Gathered purposely for you. 
1176. Lichen, on stones, perhaps a var. of 1174. 
1177. Marchantia, &c., steep clayey banks of River nr. Patea village; compare with 1158. 
1178. Jungermannia, side of watercourse, W. base of Ruahine. 
1179. Lichen, on Fuchsia excorticata, 		ditto
1180. Lichen,	d——	d——		d——
1181. (Scraps), 2 Mosses, 1 Jungerm., stones, in ditto. 
1182. Mosses, thickets, slopes, base of Tongariro. 
1183. Jungermannia Taupoensis, n. sp. & nr. J. rhizobola; from deep wet glens, base of Tongariro, Taupo. 
1184. ?Jungermannia, in a watercourse, on Titiokura. 
1185. Moss, on Podocarpus dacrydioides, high ranges, nr. Tarawera
1186. Jungermannia: from Te Waiparuti; same range. 
1187. Lichen, on Fagus, wood nr. Patea: (comp. with 1168.)
1188. Lichen, on ditto	d——	. (comp. with 1176)
1189. Jungermannia, from a river nr. Patea: ?2 species
1190. Lichen, high barren hills, nr. Patea; perhaps var. of 1173. 
1191. Mosses, upper branches of a lately fallen tree, forest, nr. Patea. 
1192. Jungermannia (scrap), much bruised, &c., found in Coat pocket – perhaps J. rhizobola, or near it. 
1193. Lichen, (?Stereocaulon) on stones, in watercourse, with 1178. 
1194. Lichen, on Fagus, low hills, western side of Ruahine range. 
1195. ditto			ditto
1196. ditto			ditto
1197. ditto, with small Jungermannia	ditto
1198. ditto			ditto
1199. ditto			ditto
1200. ditto			ditto
1201. ditto			ditto
1202. ditto			ditto
1203. ditto, with Jungermannia	ditto
1204. ditto			ditto
1205. ditto, with Moss, &c. 		ditto
1206. ditto,   ditto			ditto
1207. Grammatis,  ditto		ditto
1208. Lichen, &c., on No. 1102
1209. Lichen, on leaves of Leucopogon Fraseri; dry banks, nr. Mission Station. 
1210. Elegant Lichen, ground, wood, top of high hill, opposite to Bare Island. 
1211. Lichen, on Podocarpus dacrydioides, Pakiaka wood, M. Station. 
1212. Lichen, on 		ditto		ditto
1213. Lichen, 	d——		d——	d——
1214. Lichen, on pebble, dry banks, Hawke’s Bay, scarce. 
1215. Lichen, d——	d——	d——
1216. Lichen, (& small Jungermannia) on living “Tawero” – i.e. Weinmannia sp., – forest beyond Te Hawera village. 
1217. ?Jungermannia, pretty plant, from the bed of Te Ruaakauia River, same forest, adhering to stones – plentiful under water. 
1218. Small, pea-green Jungermannia, on Moss, living Trees, same forest. 
1219. Small Jungermannia	ditto,	ditto,	ditto,
1220. Small Lichen		d——	d——
1221. a Black Fungus, which destroys the beautiful appearance of ferns, &c., – common on Hymenophyllum, &c., (hanging drooping plant) ?Antennaria, sp. – same forest. 
1222. Compact Jungermannia, on living Weinmannia, same forest. 
1223. Lichen, on living Melicytus,		ditto
1224. Jungermannia, on decaying tree, 3 species	ditto
1225. Fungus, bark of reclining trees,		ditto
1226. Lichen, on a dead branch		ditto
1227. Fungus, on	d——d——		ditto
1228. An elegant Moss, found adhering to roots & stones, 2 feet under-water, in the bed of Ngatahorahora stream, same forest. The discovery made me cry ενρεκα though in rain!
1229. An elegant blue-green Lichen, on Myrtus pedunculata, same wood; curious colour when fresh, & very scarce. 
1230. A most elegant plant. – what? a ?Jungermannia with Fern like ?? fructification. – Same tree. Same wood. 
1231. Jungermannia (?sent before) on wet logs		same woods
1232. Lichen, on Leptospermum, Ruamahanga River. 
1233. Handsome Moss, on decaying wet logs. 		Same woods. 
1234. Lichen, upper branches of a fallen tree, (scarce)	ditto. 
1235. Lichen, trunks of living trees,	   (scarce) ditto. 
1236. Lichen, on stones, –  same locality as 1232. 
1237. Lichen, on Tree	d——
1238. Lichen, d——	d——
1239. Jungermannia, upper branches of living Weinmannia,		ditto
1240. Lichen, trunks of living trees, comp. with 1235 ) ditto
1241. Lichen, on stones, in wood;    comp. with 1232.)	
1242. Lichen, stump of a Tree, Te Hawera forest. 
1243. Lichen, upper branches living Weinmannia; same forest. 
1244. Lichen, on living trees, same locality as 1232. 
1245. Lichen, on Weinmannia, ditto	very scarce. 
1246. Barren Moss, on ground, same forest as 1242. 
1247. A small Jungermannia, on Tree, same wood. 
1248. Trichomanes, (sent before) on Fern & other Trees. 
1249. Jungermannia, on Edwardsia, Te Ruataniwa, head of Wairarapa valley. 
1250. Moss,		ditto		d——
1251. Jungermannia	d		d
1252. Moss		d		d
1253. Jungermannia	d		d
1254. Jungermannia	d		d
1255. Lichen		d		d
1256. Lichen		d		d
1257. Lichen (stains paper red, in drying) d	d
1258. Jungermannia 	d		d
1259. Jungermannia & Lichen, upper branches of Plagianthus,	ditto
1260. Lichen		d——		d——
1261. Lichen, on ground			d——
1262. Splendid Lichen, growing with 1259.	d——
1263. Lichen, on ground			d——
1264. Lichen, 	d— , banks of River, under Leptospermum	d——
1265. Lichen,	d— , River’s side,		d—— 
1266. Dry Lycoperdon?-like Fungus, wet woods. 
1267. Elegant Moss on wet roots, scarce, forests, head of R. Manawatu. 
1268. Fungus on debris of “Rimu” – (Dacrydium: cupressinum)	ditto
  1268α. Jungermannia, with ditto. 		ditto
1269. Small Lichen, &c., on upper branches of Podocarpus Totara. 	ditto
1270. Small Lichen,			ditto
1271. Small Lichen,			ditto
1272. Small Lichen,			ditto
1273. Jungermannia,			ditto
1274. Jungermannia,			ditto
1275. Jungermannia,			ditto
1276. Lichen,				ditto
1277. Lichen, forest, head of Manawatu River. 
1278. Fine white fungus, epiphytical upon Ferns, ditto. 
1279. Handsome Jungermannia, & minute Moss, on ground,	ditto
1280. Moss, on ground			ditto. 
1281. Fungus, on prostrate trees,		ditto. 
1282. Lichen, on upper branches of trees, among Moss,		ditto. 
1283. Moss,	d——,			ditto. 
1284. Jungermannia, minute, on bark		ditto. 
1285. Lichen, large, gorgeous, (sent before), on twigs & branches of trees, ditto. 
1286. Alga, from a stream, beyond Te Rotoatara Lake, on stones, under water. 
1287. Jungermannia, on stones, bog, Turakirae, S. head of Palliser Bay. 
  1287α. Moss,		d——		d——
1288. ?Conferva, from a waterfall, nr. Mukamukanui, Cook’s Straits. 
1289. Elegant green, frondose Jungermannia, growing with 1135. 
1290. Elegant Lichen, dry rocks, Cook’s Straits. 
1291. ?Lichen	d——		d——
1292. Jungermannia, &c., Thickets, Cook’s Straits. 
1293. Lichen, upper branches of a tree, wood, head of Wairarapa valley. 
1294. ??Jungermannia, or, Anthoceros, from hills, among fern, near Castle Point, E. Coast. – lovely sight when fresh. 
  1294α. Small Moss, with ditto. 
1295. Elegant Moss, crags, heights, Cape Kidnapper: new to me. 
1296. Portion of the rind of a Fungus, found here, in grassy plains, common; attaining to a large size, 1-3lbs, stalkless. I have again & again tried to dry one, but could not succeed. The specimens are from a young one. When old they burst, being filled with a powder, which, together with the plant (when old) is of a claret color. The Natives toast & eat them. Native name “Tukurau”. 
1297. Woody fungus on trees. Peculiar black soot-like sporules? are thrown out from it, after being laid by for a short while in paper. But I sent you this, I know, from the North. 
1298. ?Marchantia, among fern, road to Aropauanui, Hawke’s Bay. 
1299. Mosses		d——		d——
1300. Handsome, erect Lichen (only 1 specimen), ground, base of Tongariro. 
1301. Jungermannia, road to Te Hawera. 
1302. Jungermannia, &c., low ground, nr. the sea, Te Awanga, Hawke’s Bay. 
1303. Moss		d——		d——
1304. Moss,		d——		d——
1305. Sundries,		d——		d——
1306. Moss, on stones, wood, road to Aropauanui, Hawke’s Bay. 
1307. Moss,	d——	d——		d——
1308. Jungermannia, n. sp., – a curious species, examine it well, especially its roots. From among fern, hills, above Tangoio village, Hawke’s Bay. It grows singly at a little distance from each other, and, when fresh, looks so much like a little cabbage, that I have named it J. Brassicæformis, (Ms.) W.C. 
1309. Curious crimson Fungus, growing with preceding. 
1310. Lichen, stump, old fern tree; same locality as 1306. 
1311. Moss, on Tree,		d——
1312. Lichen, same locality as 1298. 
1313. Lichen, growing with 1310. 
1314. Fungoid Lichen; on dead tree, glen, nr. Tangoio. (Perhaps 2 species?)
1315. Small Moss, from low ground, nr. Te Kapemaihi, Hawke’s Bay: – perhaps same as 1304. 
1316. Curious Fungus. (?Trichia, sp.) on old decayed tree, same locality as 1306: the first time I have met with anything of this kind. 
1317. Jungermannia; ground, between Ahuriri & Te Kapemaihi; comp. with 1302. 
1318. Lichen, on pumice, dry banks, Ahuriri. 
1319. A specimen of ½ burnt wood, from Te Onetapu, base of Tongariro. This wood is doubtless very ancient, – and is a part of the remains of an ancient forest destroyed by an eruption, from that Volcano; now being uncovered by the winds, &c. Nothing grows there but my large Gentian. 
1320. Scrap: fruit of a Drimys for examination; woods nr. Tarawera. 
1321. Sphæria Robertsii, from same place. 
1322. Fruit of a Clematis, from R. Waipoua; which I think is distinct from C. hexasepala. 
1323. Fruit of Aciphylla from Taupo: I am now certain of 2, & think there may be 3 species. 

—————————Algæ, etc. ————————

1324. Long filiform Alga, beach, Akitio, E. Coast; only 1 sp. 
1325. Small green Alga, growing in beds, pools, tidal rocks, nr. Cape Turnagain. 
1326. Bladdered Alga, tidal rocks, Parimahu, E. Coast, – resembles a Bag. 
1327. Red hair-like Alga, scarce, loses its colour on drying, beach. [Island’s species.]
1328. Green Alga, from nr. Castle Point, scarce. 
  1328α. Small black Alga, with preceding. 		
1329. Small cæspitose Alga; tidal rocks, nr. Cape Turnagain. (Small bivalve shell within). 
1330. Sea-green Alga, with Lithophyta, (beautiful sp.) from Te Unuunu, nr. Castle Point, E. Coast. 
1331. Red Alga, from ditto: (splendid specimen)
1332. Corallina, from beaches nr. Te Huariki. 
1333. Sertularia, Hawke’s Bay. 
1334. Alga, tidal rocks, Mataikona, nr. Castle Point. 
1335. Alga, on beach,	d——
1336. Alga    d——		d——
1337. Alga    d——		d——
1338. Alga    d——		d——
1339. Alga    d——		nr. Cape Turnagain
1340. Alga    d——		nr. Huariki
1341. Alga    d——	, Hawke’s Bay, & Bare Island; a pretty little fern-like species, new to me. 
1343. Alga, on beach	nr. Cape Turnagain. 
1344. Alga    d——		d——
1345. Alga    d——		d——	Perhaps 2 sp. 
1346. Elegant Alga (?Ptilota) – perhaps 
 more than 1 species		)  general
1347. Alga,			)  along the
1348. Alga,			)  Coast. 
1349. Alga, red, (scarce), – beaches, Coast. 
1350. Alga, beaches, nr. Castle Point. 
1351. Alga, d——,		d——. 
1352. Alga, tidal rocks, 	nr. ditto. 
1353. Alga, on beaches,	nr. ditto. 
1354. Alga, d——,		d——, (scarce). 
1355. Alga, d——,		d——, (scarce). 
1356. Alga, d——,		d——, (scarce). 
1357. Green, crisp Alga, d—, Hawke’s Bay. 
1358. ?Sertularia, d——	d——. 
1359. Small Alga, d——	d——. 
1360. Elegant Alga, d——	d—— (quite new to me)
1361. Alga, (scrap), d——	d——. 
1362. Alga, (scrap), d——	E. Coast. 
1363. Corallina, tidal rocks, Parimahu, nr. Cape Turnagain. 
1364. Corallina, 	d——		d——
1365. Corallina, 	d——		d——
1366. Corallina, 	d——		d——
1367. Corallina, 	d——		d——
1368. Corallina, Beaches, Hawke’s Bay
1369. Corallina, 	d——	d——
1370. Corallina, 	d——	d——
1371. Zoophyte, 	d——	d——
1372. Corallina, 	d——	E. Coast; (scarce). 
1373. Alga,	d——	Hawke’s Bay. 
1374. ?Sertularia	d——	d——
1375. Alga, on beaches, nr. Castle Point: lovely claret color – new to me. 
1376. Alga, 	d————————— ,
1377. Alga, on tidal rocks, nr. Cape Turnagain: perhaps these 3 last Nos. are only varieties of one plant. 
1378. Alga, general, along E. Coast. 
1379. Alga, beaches, Hawke’s Bay. 
1380. Alga, d——		d——
1381. Small, parasitical Alga, Hawke’s Bay. 
1382. Curious Alga, coast nr. Cape Palliser: only 1 specimen. 
1383. Alga, fm. P. Nicholson Harbour. 
1384. Alga,   d—————
1385. Alga, from E. Coast; small portion of a frond – which is 8-14 feet long, chocolate colored when fresh, nr. Cape Turnagain. There is another, olive-brown, species exceedingly like it. 
1386. Alga, beaches, E. Coast.	)   fronds of
1387. Alga, d——	d——      	)   these 3 species 
1388. Alga, d——	d——      	)   are 6-12 feet.
1389. Small Alga, Hawke’s Bay. 
1390. Alga,	ditto. 
1391. Sponge,	ditto. 
1392. Alga, beaches, Palliser Bay – (see, No. 894 last lot). 
1393. One half of sundry scraps – Hawke’s Bay. 
1394. Alga, beaches, Hawke’s Bay. 
1395. Alga, (2 species) d——, d——
1396. d——	d——	d——
1397. d——	d——	d——
1398. d—— (2 species) d——d——
1399. d——	d——	d——
1400. d——	d——	d——
1401. d——	d——	d——
1402. d——	d——	d——
1403. d—— (2 species) d——d——
1404. d——	d——	d——
1405. d——	d——	d——
1406. Alga, beaches, Hawke’s Bay: (2 species)
1407. ditto,	d——	d——
1408. ditto,	d——	d——  (2 species)
1409. d——	d——	d——
1410. d——	d——	d—— (?2 species)
1411. d——	d——	d—— (2 species)
1412. d——	d——	d——: parasitical. 
1413. d——	d——	d——
1414. d——	d——	d——
1415. Algæ	d——	d——: (Sundries; share of scraps.)
1416. Corallina,	d——	d——
1417. d——	d——	d——
1418. d——	d——	d——
1419. d——	d——	d——
1420. d——	d——	d——
1421. A Transverse  Section of an enormous Alga, found growing on the E. Coast, in 1-2 fath. water, a few yards beyond low-water mark, nr. Cape Kidnapper, & also, nr. Castle Point: – 25-45 feet long, and about a foot wide, plain lanceolate frond, sometimes bifid at apex. The Natives use them to put cooked Pork, &c., in; also, as Trowsers, or Gaiters, when walking through the harsh fern. –
¬¬¬¬¬_________________

1422. Small Lichen, bark of a Tree, from Te Pakiaka wood, nr. Mission Station. 
1423. Ditto	d——		d——
1424. Ditto & Jungerma., d——	d——
1425. Ditto & Jungerma., d——	d——
1426. Ditto, on pebble, dry banks, nr. Mission Station, (sent before)
1427. Ditto,  d——	d——	d——
1428. Black ditto (?Antennaria) on living tree, Waipatiki, Hawke’s Bay. 
1429. Lichen, on dead branch of tree, 	from ditto. 
1430. Moss, dead log, from Te Pakiaka wood, nr. Mission Station. 
1431. Moss, living trees, nr. Raukawa, H. Bay. 
1432. Moss, on ground, among Fern, road from Raukawa. 
1433. Large Jungermannia, from summit of Ruahine mountn. range, a most elegant plant when fresh, growing together & over each other in dense masses: in shaded spots, ground. 
1434. Small filiform red Jungermannia, with ditto. I have both species growing under glass – I have (I regret to say) lost my good specimens. 
1435. Moss, &c., from a bog, nr. Te Roto-a-Kiwa Lake, H. Bay. 
1436. Moss, ground, nr. Waipoua River,	d—
1437. Lichen, on living Alectryon, high ridge nr. Raukawa, d—
1438. Jungermannia, &c., same tree. 
1439. Moss, ground, top of same high ridge. 
1440. Moss, from a charred log, nr. Waipoua River. 
1441. Lichen, on Aralia crassifolia
1442. Jungermannia, & Moss, same locality as 1439. 
1443. Curious little Marchantia, floating among Lemna, (next no.,) in Roto-a-Kiwa Lake. 
1444. Lemna,			d——
1445. Curious Lichen on a rock, hills, nr. Kohinurakau, H. Bay. 
1446. Moss, from ditto. 
1447. Moss from low hills, nr. ditto; on ground. 
1448. Moss,	d——		d——
1449. Moss, crags, Ngawakatatara, H. Bay. 
1450. Small Marchantia, same locality as 1432. 
1451. Black Lichen, on shrubs (Composit.), dry banks nr. Station. 
1452. Curious ?Lichen on a Geranium leaf  d—— d——
1453. Lichen, ground, pebbles, & sticks,     d——	 d——
1454. Moss, on pumice		     d——	d——
1455. Clianthus, n. sp., alæ broader than in C. puniceus, very obtuse not acuminate; Dark blotch on vexillum, at point of junction with carina which is also broader than in C. puniceus. Leaves broader than in that species, and corolla of a deeper colour, with a slightly corrugated fleshy appearance. Pubescent under leaves & on petioles; pubescence brown, adpressed, upper surface of leaves yellowish green, shining as if oiled. Shrub, large, spreading, 6-8 feet high. First detected 2 yrs. ago (or more) in this neighbourhood. Specimens from Garden. 
1456. Grass, from hills nr. Aropauanui. 
1457. Gnaphalium, a large shrubby plant; same locality as preceding. 
1458. Cerastium, a large plant, with preceding – all specimens sent, & many others, from one root, – procumbent. 
1459. Dodonea, – shrubs, 2-4 feet high, Kapemaihi, H. Bay. 
1460. Gnaphalium, from Ahuriri: a more erect sp. than 1457. 
[Erechtites quadridentata]
1461. Leucopogon ?Fraseri, hills nr. Tangoio, where it grows in beds. 
1462. Cheilanthes, long stiped sp. (or var.), from dry banks, Ahuriri. 
1463. Edwardsia, growing with preceding: – see, No. 166 last lot. 
1464. Drosera (No. 1064) in flower. – I now find this sp. to have a little tuber – at the end of its root. 
1465. Viscum (comp. with 1154, same locality): perhaps 2 sp. 
1466. Ranunculus (see, No. 987,) – this from garden, would ’twere better!
1467. Ourisia – from garden: – see, No. 409 last lot. 
1468. Pimelea, banks of R. Waipoua. 
1469. Edwardsia, growing with preceding, elegant shrub, 10-12 feet, fully in leaf before flowering. 
1470. Scrap of a Rubus, woods, nr. Raukawa. 
1471. Nephrodium, 	d——	d——: some sps. are much larger. 
1472. from Ngawakatatara; & sent, I think, before; vide, 404, last lot. 
1473. Polypodium, ?n. sp., from living trees, hills nr. Raukawa, Hawke’s Bay; – a sp. very near tenellum, but I think quite distinct. P. caudatum, (Ms.) W.C. 
1474. Specimens of 2 unexpanded Clemates, from Aropauanui. 
1475. I grieve to send you such a scrap, – of what, too, I had plenty of! But it cannot be helped – I have lost all my specimens of this plant; and this bit is torn off from a living plant in my garden – and only its dead edge!! It is a Forstera, for my specimens had dead flowers closely resembling Forster’s drawing of “Phyllachne” (Gen. char.) and it may prove distinct from P. clavigera; as I perceive, its leaves are not knobbed at their apices, and are broader at their bases, than those of that sp. – From the very summit of Ruahine Mountain range, where it grows in hemispherical clumps – like Mniarum. 
1476. Another poor specimen from same locality – a plant which I have not seen in flower, but which I took for an Oreobolus. More, however, of both these hereafter. 
1477. A little gem! a minute little Myosotis, from dry banks, a few feet above high water mark, Mission Station, H. Bay. I detected this early in 1846, but, from its very small size, lost sight of it again. Lately, however, I was gratified with its re-discovery. Its flowers are yellow. Minima, would be a good sp. name for it, I think. 
1478. Orchis, same locality as 1437. 
1479. Ditto, hills near Tangoio. 
1480. Ditto, (Acianthus) with preceding: comp. with 1135. 
1481. Small procumbent creeping Caryophyllous plant, growing with 1432. 
1482. Moss (barren) from a stream, nr. ditto. 
1483. Minute Cerastium, very common every-where: this sp. flowers so very early in the season that I have scarce met with a good specimen. Ahuriri, Mission Station. 
1484. Orchis, from Raukawa: comp. with 1478. 
1485. Cardamine, from low spots, nr. Mission Station; I only met with this one sp., but I think I sent it to you before?
1486. Small plant, low grounds, nr. Mission Station: (sent in last lot). 
1487. A scrap, from a stream at Raukawa; the plant is too young to discriminate it; but, if not that large Veronica (No. 1 last lot), I think it may prove to be an Epilobium. 
1488. Half of all my scraps!
1489. Flowers, Celmisia; and, I think, of C. exilis, 1003. 
1490. Veronica)     obtained on my Taupo Journey
1491. Veronica) 	– perhaps belonging to some 
1492. Veronica)     of those already numbered.
1493. Scrap of a Panax from Ruahine range – shrub, 6-10 feet, and which I thought to be distinct from P. arboreum; this sp. brought for exam. & comp. —
1494. Pentachondra, from Ruahine, summit; comp. with No. 952 from Taupo. 
1495. Metrosideros from woods beyond Te Hawera village, – and, I think, a n. sp. – I cannot say much about it. 
1496. Young fronds of a Fern from a bog near Herehere, Hawke’s Bay. – comp. with No. 88, lot pr. Mr. Busby; if it should prove to be the same sp. it is a curious fact, that during twelve years or more of wandering in N. Zealand I have only met with this fern in three places, – each place 2½o  distant – i.e. Bay of Islands – Bay of Plenty – & Hawke’s Bay!
1497. Little Arthropodium? (See, No. 360, last lot,) from garden. 
1498. Little Epilobium from garden; but obtained from nr. head of Manawatu river. 
1499. A ditto from garden; but brought from Ruahine range. 
1500. Stellaria, a species common about woods, succulent, with colored margins to leaves, &c. 

		For Dr. Joseph Hooker —
1501. Fossil wood from Cliffs, at E. end of Palliser Bay: – imbedded in sandstone & clay. 
1502. Ditto, from S.W. end of Palliser Bay – I send you my only sp. 
1503. From cliffs nr. Cape Kidnapper – extending in low horizontal strata under sandstone & clay of 100-180 feet alt. 
1504. From	d——		d——
1505. From	d——		d——
1506. Charcoal thrown up by Sea on the beaches Hawke’s Bay; but not, I think, of this period. ¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬

Omitted —
	(N.B. These Nos. accord with those in Letter, Decr. 22/46.)
907β. Jungermannia, from wet logs, Te Pakiaka wood, nr. Mission Station. 
908β. Lanceolate-leaved Ophioglossum, wood, road to Aropauanui. 
[O. lusitanicum]
909β. Small Pratia? from riverside, Tangoio village: Comp. with No. 263. printed “Journal”. 
910β. From River side, Aropauanui. 
911β. Myosotis, from Waipatiki, road to Aropauanui. 
912β. Orchis, perhaps 2 species: grassy spots nr. Mission Station. 
913β. ?Mazus, growing with preceding. 
914β. Large Viola, River side, Aropauanui. 
915β. Ranunculus, bog, Tangoio. 
916β. Labium, hairy stalked sp. from Aropauanui. 
917β. Lagenophora, hills among fern, road to Aropauanui. 
[L. forsteri]
918β. Moss, ground, Pakiaka wood, nr. Mission Station. 
919β. Carex, grassy spots, nr. Station. 
[C. inverse]
920β. Little? Restiaceous plant, ditto. 
[Zoysia pungens]
921β. Large broad leaved Ophioglossum, with preceding. 
  These you can make 907β., 908β: – to prevent confusion. 
W. Colenso, September 18/47
xxx  I had almost forgot to say, the specimens in the little bottle of spirits, will be found to agree with Nos. 912β. – 1059 – and (fruit of) 984. 
 # 



29 September to 20 October 1848

	Waitangi, Hawke’s Bay,
        New Zealand, Sept. 29th, 1848. 

Sir W. J. Hooker, K. H.,
&c. &c. &c. 
Royal Botanic Cardens,
Kew, London. 

Kindly favored by 
James Busby, Esq. 	

My dear Sir William,
I have just finished putting up another lot of specimens for you, containing upwards of 800 numbered lots. I commenced my overhauling and culling work in July but (although I have stuck closely to it whenever I could) have only now brought it to a close. I shall send the Case off to Wellington by a little vessel expected here, and hope ere long it will be on its way to England, and that you may safely receive it, and be gratified with its contents. I have ventured to believe there are several new things in the lot, as you will find (at least by my daring to name many of them). And although some of my (supposed) species novæ may not be allowed to stand, I feel assured that others will. However, there they are and they must speak for themselves. Some of the few seeds and Fruits, I hope will preserve their vitality, and germinate in the Royal Gardens. There is, likewise a lot of Fossil Wood from different localities, which I hope may be of some service to Dr. Joseph. I have heard there are several Botanical Collectors now in these Islands, both French and German; so that, if somewhat is not soon done by Dr. Joseph towards the Flora of N. Zealand (either by synopsis, or something shorter still) he may find himself forestalled – at least to a great extent. – 
I have also put in (in a very great hurry) four bird skins (?Ardea, Halcyon and 2 Podiceps which I procured for Lord Derby, but they were so mangled in skinning, and (during my absence) the principal one torn by cats (besides having had its fine long white plumes taken away by the Natives before it fell into my hands,) that I almost concluded not to send them. But enough remains to shew the species, and (perhaps) to add another known living animal to the roll of Science. – This bird is so scarce and so prized by the Natives (who ornament their hair with its lovely white plumes) that a native Chief living near me (poor as they all are in this neighbourhood) actually gave a sovereign to the white man who had shot it for the bird! The white was bringing the bird to me, but his cupidity overcame his generosity. Unfortunately I did not obtain it until its larger feathers had all been plucked away, of which however I subsequently got a couple, which I have enclosed. During 14 years’ residence I have only seen 4 of these birds; I have heard they are more common in the Middle Island. 
You will also find that I have burthened you with a small parcel, containing a few (already published) Ferns, for my cousin, which, as well as a small parcel for my London agents, Dixon & Co. I will thank you to forward. 
The case of plants which I had last year packed and sent to Wellington, was only a short while ago – and then only through the kindness of the Captain of H.M.S. “Calliope” – shipped from that port. I rejoice, however, that it is gone by so good a conveyance, and hope it will not have received damage during its long sojourn at Wellington.
Two months ago I received a long and most welcome letter from Dr. Joseph, together with some Books, among which, too, were, at least three from yourself (Lindley’s works, and Sp. Filicum pt. iv.) for all which I am greatly indebted and have to thank you both. – And now, only a few days back, a parcel containing the 1st part of Dr. Harvey’s splendid Nereis Australis came to hand, with a long letter from that gentleman, enclosing a note of introduction from yourself. Of course I shall do all that I can (which now is not much) in my lonely wanderings along the shores of this coast to aid Dr. Harvey in making his work as complete as possible; and hope he (you) will find many interesting if not new species of algæ among those last, and these about to be sent. I cannot now send a parcel of algæ for him, as what I have put together were collected for you and your son. But I do not grieve on this account, because I know that you will do what you can for him. I intend writing Dr. Harvey by this opportunity; and your Son too somewhere on my spring journey down the coast, which I intend to commence in a few days. 
From Dr. Joseph’s letter I gather, some works sent must have been lost – or, are still napping by the way. As he mentions (particularly) Raoul’s Flor. Nov. Zel. which I have never seen. A book, too, of all others (save his own Flora of these Islands) I should like much to obtain. The last Nos. which have reached me of the different Bot. Serials are as follows: – Sp. Filicum pt. iv., Lond. Jl. Bot., No. 66, Icones Plant. pt. 14, Flora Antarct. xxiv, De Cand. Prodr. ix – 
I perceive you have rejected the claim of Lindsæa viridis to the rank of a var. not to mention species. In this, however, I cannot now acquiesce; but I am silent. L. australis, too, may also, upon examination and comparison be considered identical with L. linearis. However, as I find that Dr. Joseph has resuscitated Hymenophyllum minimum so, perhaps some of my rejected Hymenophyllæ, particularly H. villosum (of which I now send you a plenty of specimens), may still stand a chance of again raising their drooping heads. I smile when I fancy what a regular battle you will have among my many (so-called) new species of Adiantum (4, or more!) now sent. 
Our good friend Ronald Gunn, has lately forwarded me a lot of copies of the Journal of one of my rambling Excursions (the same in fact which I sent you, only with many corrections and additions, and which you published in the Lond. Journal of Bot., and also sent me some copies of) – a couple of which I venture to put into the case and beg you and Dr. Joseph to do me the honor of accepting them. 
I cannot now add any more, although there is very much of Botanical Information which I should wish to write but which (after all) might be of little utility. I have written somewhat – perhaps more carelessly and hastily than usual – which Ms. you will find in the case. 
Hoping soon to have the unalloyed pleasure of hearing from you, 
Believe me, my dear Sir William,
Ever Sincerely Yours,
William Colenso. 

P.S. I think I mentioned in one of my former letters our having been flooded with the waters from the hill country – which will account for some of my specimens being so mouldy (during my absence) and which I greatly regret. 	W.C. 
Finally closed, Oct. 20/48. 

If any of the Gentlemen Curators of the Linnæan Society, could give me a list of the Insects now sent, – or at least of the new species, if there are any, – I should esteem it as a favour. 		W.C. 

A List of Botanical Specimens, put up for Sir W. J. Hooker, July 1848; finished in September 
–––––––––––––––––––
1507. A Cordyline? from hills, base of Ruahine mountain range, N. side; plant 6-7 feet, stem slender, panicle 4-5 feet long, lax, lateral drooping. The smaller sp. sent, is the termination of panicle. Compare with sps. No. 1118, from heights, Port Nicholson. 
1508. My splendid sp. (No. 82, lot pr. Mr. Busby) at length detected in flower & fruit. Cordyline utilis, W.C. arborescent, 8-12 feet, stem remarkably stout, 7-10in. diamr.; panicle, lateral drooping, rigid. Skirts of forests, hills, base of mountain range. Extensively used by the Natives in manufacture of “mats”; fibres of stem used; strong, durable. Nat. name of plant, Tikapu: if garment made from it, Toii. The 2 smaller leaves sent, are bracts. 
1509. Astelia same locality, but in Fagus woods; growing concealed (inflorescence) in debris of Fagus. 
1510. Astelia, (2 flowers brought me by one of my Natives) from same locality; stouter plant than preceding. 
1511. Podocarpus ??n. sp. 1 Tree only detected; same locality; – 26 feet high. Nat. name, “Pahautea”. Bark, deciduous. 
1512. Composit. shrub, 6-9 feet high, irregular growth, skirts of woods; same locality. 
1513. Wahlenbergia, (vide, No. 19,) from hills, W. side of Ruahine. 
1514. Suttonia montana, n. sp., W.C., from same locality. Only 1 plant detected, a small tree of rigid growth, 14 feet high, and only 1 sp. in flower, & 2 in fruit. 
[Myrsine montana]
1515. Calceolaria ??repens, n. sp., W.C. – sides of river, base of Ruahine range, W. side; – not found in flower. 
1516. Epilobium Cunninghamianum, n. sp., W.C., sides of same river. 
1517. Carmichælia flagelliformis, n. sp., W.C., an elegant slender tree, 14 feet high, very long drooping filiform branches; low woods, same River. 
1518. A small green grass, same locality. 
1519. Another Epilobium; ditto. 
1520. Aceana apparently diffg. from A. sanguisorba (vide, Nos. 18 & 32), from woods, nr. top of Ruahine mountain range. 
1521. Sps. of a red flowered shrubby tree (Celastrus?? – but sent before) petals very fugacious, these fæm: see, No. 1633, for male sps. from skirts of woods nr. summit. 
[Aristotelia fruticosa]
1522. Gaultheria, shrub, from ditto. 
1523. Elegant, yellow flowered, long leaved Loranthus; (vide, sps. No. 74 in fruit,) flower scarcely expanded; parasitical on Fagus, forests half-way up. 
1524. Coprosma (n. sp. nr. cuneata,) dense shrubs, 2-3 feet, nr. top. 
1525. Composit., at last! the sp. sent pr. Mr. Busby, No. 77, – diffuse tree, 12-16 feet, woods nr. top: very musk like smell; peculiarly agreeable & scarce plant. 
[Olearia ilicifolia]
1526. Composit. – tree of same habit as preceding – same size – same locality, and equally scarce. 
[Olearia macrodonta]
1527. Coprosma depressa: n. sp., W.C., dense bushes, prostrate, creeping over logs, & rotten timber; hills nr. top; 1-2 feet high. 
[C. depressa]
1528. A bit of my Aciphylla [grandis], (No. 87,) – just to shew, that though it is diœcious, it is sometimes polygamous (?) but exam. 
[A. colensoi]
1529. A Panax, which has long puzzled me. I call it P. intermedia, (as it appears to be between P. simplex & P. arboreum): styles longer than in P. arboreum, & sulcated internally, (see scrap, No. 1493,) A sp. also of the young plant, with a strangely different leaf, sent. Woods, nr. top; small tree, 10-14 feet. 
[Panax simplex]
1530. Small grass, hills nr. top. 
[Deyeuxia setifolia]
1531. Small Epilobium; ditto. 
1532. Gorgeous Red Loranthus, on Fagus; woods, half way up – (vide, sps. No. 33) – but see, whether 2 species. It is the glory of these forests: bushes of flowers, 4-5 feet in diam. some low enough to gather; some on topmost branches of F. 50, 60 feet. 
1533. A Viscum, woods, half way up. 
1534. A little Carex, top. 
[C. pyrenaica]
1535. Gaultheria corymbosa, n. sp., W.C., a small shrub, 2-3 feet high on stony ridges near the summit. Flowers, white, beautiful, but often eaten by insects. 
1536. Astelia compacta, n. sp., W.C., ground, Fagus woods near summit forming dense bushes. 
1537. Phyllocladus, in fruit, from stony ridges nr. top, vide, No. 915. 
1538. Pimelea, dense, bushy shrub, 2 feet high; hills nr. summit. 
1539. Viola, small, top of range. 
1540. Plantago Ruahinensis, from summit growing densely overspreadg. surface; leaves spotted. P. Ruahinensis, n. sp., W.C. 
1541. ?Dacrydium biformis, (See, No. 911). 
  1541,α. Small, light green Jungermannia, on same. 
  1541,β. Small, dark red Jungermannia, on ditto. 
1542. Coriaria, from nr. top (vide No. 912). 
1543. A feathery gall, the work, perhaps, of a sp. of Cynips? on a Composit. shrub, from base of range, (vide No. 122, lot, mentioned in Ptd. “Journal”)
1544. A small plant, open downs nr. Raukawa: more bushy sp. than that formerly sent, from banks near the Sea, Station. 
[Gypsophila tubulosa]
1545. A little plant, growing with previous – (but, see, Nos. 723-898). 
1546. Sieversia villosa, W.C., a scarce plant, growing among the debris from stony ridges, summit of Ruahine mount. range; & very near to your S. albiflora. 
1547. Fagus adpressa, W.C. – fine timber trees, wood, base of mountain range, 70-80 feet high: a sp. very near F. fusca. 
[F. fusca]
1548. Fagus pubescens, W.C. – banks of river Makaroro, base of range, fine trees, 50-60 feet, – sp. near F. Solandri. 
1549. Fagus microphylla, W.C. – from stony ridges, top of range; small trees, 6-14 feet high; a sp. near F. cliffortioides. 
[F. solandri]
1550. Drapetes, from top: (see, Nos. 913, & 24.)
1551. Fagus Solandri?, from banks of R. Makororo. 
1552. A  Podocarpus, from W. summit of range; male sps. (vide. No. 991.)
1553. A small grass, from nr. summit. 
1554. A Dianella, from woods, R. Makororo, base of range. 
[D. intermedia]
1555. Geranium, from top, growing cæspitosely (see, No. 920). 
[G. microphyllum]
1556. My great Ranunculus! a good sp. for a good drawing: though the living specimens there are much larger. 
1557. A grass, hills, base of range. 
1558. Gaultheria lanceolata, W.C., shrub, 5-7 feet, wood, nr. top. 
[G. rupestris]
1559. Senecio? from summit: several branches ascending from one root. 
[Erechtites scaberula]
1560. Epilobium ellipticum. W.C., from nr. top: remarkably large flower for so small a species. 
1561. Weinmannia macrophylla, W.C., fine tree, 30-40 feet, nr. base of range; woods, banks R. Makororo. 
[W. racemosa]
1562. Leucopogon, graceful shrub, 8-12 feet, nr. top. 
1563. Grass (Hierochloe?) from near top; a much smaller species than that of the plains. [H. redolens]
  1563α. flowers of ditto (?) from lower down, near base. 
[H. redolens]
1564. Fagus punctata, W.C., a species having affinity with both fusca, & adpressa; Leaves curiously cobwebed under in 3 last angles of nerves, & petioles much longer than in fusca; fine tree, 50-60 feet, banks of R. Makororo. 
[F. fusca]
1565. Dracophyllum, from top; (vide, No. 40.)
1566. Dracophyllum, from top, growing with preceding; dense bush, 2-3 feet high; certainly a difft. sp., though not in flower. 
1567. Composit. shrub, 2-4 feet, hills nr. base. 
1568. Dry, short grass, growing in tufts, nr. top. 
[Ehrharta colensoi]
1569. Suttonia repens, n. sp., W.C., top of range, among grass & herbage, only 3 sps. in fruit detected. (Vide, No. 914; where I supposed it to be a Metrosideros (!) from its habit & glandular leaves.) This plant has much pleased me. 
1570. Small Gaultheria, a few inches high; grassy slopes, half ways up. 
1571. Veronica, a small shrub, 2 feet high, with large flowers. 
[V. buxifolia]
1572. Veronica;  d——             , 3 feet high. 
1573. Taraxicum? from summit. 
[T. officinale]
1574. Carex, from nr. top. 
[C. acicularis]
1575. Composit., (sent before). 
[Celmisia incana]
1576. Celmisia, from top. 
[C. longifolia var. gracilenta]
1577. Plantago, from top: compare with 1540. 
[P. brownii]
1578. Sps. of the curious plant sent before (No. 916), these as those were past flowering, though so early in the season; but after diligent search I found some petals & anthers. 
[Caltha novæ-zealandiæ]
1579. Small Epilobium, from top. 
1580. A pretty green grass, from nr. top, growing singly & scarce. 
[Poa kirkii var. mackayi]
1581. Curious little plant of cæspitose growth; in snow-run, summit. 
[Abrotanalla pusilla]
1582. Minute little plant, ditto, grass-like, long exserted anthers; growing with preceding. 
1583. Drosera, from side of a snow-water pool, among moss; summit. 
1584. Pterostylis, from among grass, on top. P. montana, W.C. 
1585. Little silvery leaf Composit., of cæspitose growth; from top: only 4 sps. found in flower. (Vide, No. 919.) 
[Raoulia grandiflora]
1586. Procumbent Podocarpus? from top; scarce, & not in fl. nor fr. 
[Dacrydium laxifolium]
1587. A little gem! Astelia macrocarpa, W.C., from summit, plentiful. 
1588. Chælospora ?Novæ Zealandiæ, W.C., from top. 
[Carpha alpina]
1589. Small green Grass, from top. 
[Poa colensoi]
1590. Cardamine; ditto. 
1591. Viola; ditto. 
1592. Viola; ditto: large sp. 
1593. Euphrasia revoluta, W.C., – a pretty little sp., summit, creeping. 
1594. Epilobium crassifolium, W.C. – top. 
[E. nummularifolium]
1595. Forstera, (same, as 1475) – I thought this would prove a n. sp., but I fear it will only turn out F. clavigera, – from summit. 
1596. Small Hierochloe, from summit: an elegant sp. 
[H. fraseri]
1597. a plant (Oreobolus?) found growing in hemispherical clumps, on top. 
[O. pumilio var. pectinatus]
1598. Ourisia saxosa, n. sp., W.C., got at peril of life, from highest, bleakest crags on summit; scarce, and only found, on overhanging masses, facing S. This little plant has, however, much pleased me – 
1599. Ligusticum?, small, nr. top, plentiful & pretty. 
[L. aromaticum]
1600. Ditto?, a larger plant, a foot & more high, lower down, W. side
1601. Oreomyrrhis involucratum, W.C., from nr. top. I have ventured to consider this a n. sp., – leaves less cut, &c., than in yours. 
[O. andicola]
1602. Ranunculus parvifolius, W.C., a n. sp. and a very elegant one. It is scarce; I send you all: from summit. 
1603. Ranunculus longiscapus, W.C., from summit; edges of snow-water runs. (Compare with Taupo scraps, No. 987, & 1466.) 
[R. geraniifolius]
1604. Ourisias, from different parts of the mountain – all near top: perhaps 2, or more, species, or vars. 
1605. Ourisia, small, from top. 
[O. colensoi]
1606. Oreomyrrhis densum, W.C., from near top, exposed places; grows very thick & compact, & much larger than sp. sent, which is only half as. 
1607. Earina rupestris, W.C. dry rocks, base of range, banks of R. Makororo; labellum curiously dotted, &c. 
1608. Small Carex, from near Patea. 
1609. Small scarce Grass, d——
[Danthonia semiannularis var. alpina]
1610. Grass, woods, nr. Patea village. 
[Echinopogon ovatus]
1611. Grass, d——		d——
1612. Grass, d——	d——
[Agropyron scabrum]
1613. Grass, d——	d——
[Microlæna avenacea]
1614. Small Grass, d——	d——
1615. large Grass, d——	d——
1616. Juncaceous Plant, from Marshes near Patea. 
1617. Celmisia, with foregoing: compare with No. 1003, C. exilis. 
[C. longifolia var. graminifolia]
1618. Leptospermum pulchrum, W.C., fine handsome tree, 25 feet, banks of R. Makaroro. 
[L. ericoides]
1619. Cardamine venosum, W.C., ascent. 
[C. hirsute var. debilis]
1620. Oxalis, woods, ascent. 
[O. corniculata var. ciliifera]
1621. Galium, nr. Patea. 
1622. Carex, ditto. 
1623. Small Juncaceous? plant, ditto. 
1624. Large Moss, wood, ascent. 
1625. Small Grass, top. 
1626. Coprosma lanceolata, W.C., compact shrub, 4-5 feet, near top. 
[C. microcarpa]
1627. Veronica, foot of cliff, ascent from R. Rangitikei, bet. Ruahine and Patea, – (see, No.     last lot). 
1628. Veronica, from a waterfall, on same river; perhaps a var. of foregoing. 
[V. catarractæ]
1629. Suttonia divaricata,? – var. α major, leaves large, singly, small tree, nr. Patea, 12-16 feet. 
1630. ditto,? – var. β rotundifolia, leaves small, full of glands, small tree, 3-4 feet, top of range. 
1631. Podocarpus Cunninghamiana, n. sp., W.C., – having affinity with P. Totara, & P. coriacea: diffg. from P. Totara, in amentæ being peduncled & shorter than leaves; squamulæ, two, of a different shape, &c, and Leaves Petioled. Graceful tree. Woods, ½way up Ruahine, 20-30 feet. (See, No. 1014, last lot). 
[P. totara]
1632. Small Jungermannia on same. 
1633. Male sps of No. 1521
1634. Lagenophora lynata, W.C. banks of River Tuaraiawa, nr. Patea village: only detected in that spot; plentifully there. 
[L. pinnatifida]
1635. Lagenophora grandiflora, W.C. – with preceding. 
[L. forsteri]
1636. Lagenophora tenuifolia, W.C. from summit of range: see, No 926, last lot. 
[L. petiolata]
1637. Fine Myosotis; growing with 1634. 
[M. forsteri]
1638. Geranium depressum, W.C. – ditto –
[G. microphyllum]
1639. Fagus, (fæm.) 1 sp. only: in doubt whether F. Solandri. F. intermedia, W.C. 
[F. solandri]
1640. Uncinia, a sp. very near U. Hookeri; dry places, nr. top. 
[U. cæspitosa]
1641. Uncinia filiformis, W.C., wet spots, shaded woods, nr. top. 
1642. U. scabra, W.C., woods, nr. top. 
1643. U. affinis, W.C., dry hills. 
1644. U. cæspitosa, W.C., woods, ascent. 
1645. U. procera, W.C., ditto. 
1646. U. nigra, W.C., sides of streams, base of range. 
1647. Hookeria pennata ?var., from Mountain, only 2 specs. 
1648. Geranium, small plant, fine white large flowers, summit. 
1649. Elæocarpus sinuatus, n. sp., W.C., – woods, ascent from R. Makororo; small tree. See, on, No. 1839. 
1650. Metrosideros Formosa, W.C., a truly lovely sp., and near M. pendens (W.C.,) – from woods, beyond Raukawa; climbing trees. 
1651. Myrtus obcordiata, W.C., graceful tree, with preceding; 20-25 feet. 
  1651,α. specimens of a smaller tree, perhaps var. of preceding, 12-15 feet, banks of R. Makororo: var. glaucescens. 
1652. Myrtus coriacea, W.C., – banks of River Makororo: small tree; rigid growth, 6-8 feet; perhaps a var. of 1651. (See, No, 45 sent, pr. Mr. Busby.)
1653. Clematis, banks R. Makororo, climbing trees to 20-30 feet alt. past flowering, but I obtained panicle of pedicels, and a little ripe fruit; and what I believe to be sps. of young plants. 
[C. indivisa]
1654. Fine Haxtonia, small tree, 14-16 feet, banks of R. Makororo. 
1655. Lomaria muraria, W.C., cliffs, R. Makororo. A difficult matter to get at them. Near L. deltoides, W.C., – & see, No. 840, last lot. 
1656. Thelymitra, from hills W. side of range; had several good specimens, but lost them in a gale of wind & rain. 
(1657-1666 are missing in the original)
1667. Asplenium collinum, W.C., dry hills, woods near Patea. I have also detected it in similar situations near to the R. Manawatu. 
[A. flaccidum]
1668. Hymenophyllum; I am not sure a n. sp., but I send you a lot of specimens. It forms beautiful dark green beds around the stems of the Fagus trees, on the very summits. After a long search I found it in fruit. See 1155 last lot. H. montanum, W.C. 
1669. a Black Lichen on ditto. 
1670. Adiantum longissimum, W.C., sides of a Rivulet, nr. Patea. 
[A. affine]
1671. A small Lomaria, found nr. same locality as preceding. 
1672. A frond for examn. – Todea superba; but see & compare. 
1673. Polypodium Ruahinensis, W.C., a beautiful species – never arborescent, fronds 4-5 feet, long, woods, ascent to Ruahine, ½-way up. It has hairs under its sori, and had it been arborescent, I should have called it an Alsophila. 
[Alsophylla colensoi]
1674. Gleichenia, – which, I think, is distinct from G. Cunninghamii. It is smaller, more membranaceous, &c, &c. I send you all I have. Wood, ascent, with preceding. G. venosa, W.C., n. spec. (See, and compare, scrap No. 146, pr. Mr. Busby.) 
[G. cunninghamii]   [but also see 1974]
1675. Fagus adpressa, (♀) – fine stately trees, 70-80 feet, high ridge, road to Tarawera – nucule diffg. widely from that of F. fusca: but compare with No. 1547. 
1676. Metrosideros Formosa, fruitg. sps., wood, road to Tarawera. 
1677. Coprosma: which, when I gathered it, I took to be either C. auriculata, W.C., or C. rotundifolia, A.C., – and now I find it to be quite distinct, but I can get more. Shrub, 10-12 feet; road to Tarawera. C. parvifolia, W.C. 
1678. Polygonum, rambling over stony barren spots, tops of hills, road to Tarawera. P. rupestris, W.C. 
1679. Panax obovatum, W.C., var. P. anomalum? Shrub, banks of River near Tarawera. 
1680. Shrub, from same locality: sent last lot. 
1681. Lomaria imbricata, W.C., a beautiful sp. near gigantea, A.C. river, near Tarawera. 
1682. Aspidium (pulcherimum?) growing with foregoing. 
1683. Veronica racemosa, W.C., a lovely shrub from Aropauanui, Hawke’s Bay: 10 feet high, somewhat diffuse. 
1684. Ditto, from top of Titiokura, high range, road to Tarawera. 6-8 feet: perhaps same sp. 
1685. Ditto, from ditto; shrub, 5-6 feet. 
1686. Asplenium saxosum, W.C., – a little fern which pleased me much, from the crags top of Titiokura. 
1687. Conferva, River Waiohingaanga. 
1688. Myosotis, from near ditto. 
1689. Cercodia, from the ascent to Titiokura. 
1690. Pimelea sericea, W.C., fruit & flowers: a small sp., 10-14 inches. See, 979, last lot. 
1691. Orthoceras, tops of dry hills, W. side of Titiokura. 
1692. Uncinia rubra, W.C. top of hills, Titiokura
1693. Epilobium rubrum, W.C., Small tiny species, from Titiokura. 
1694. Small Myosotis, from Aropauanui. 
1695. ?Azorella trifoliolata, W.C., from crags, Titiokura. 
1696. Ranunculus minimaflora, W.C., from hills above Tangoio; I wish I had more of it. 
1697. Hydrocotyle, large sp., river, Aropauanui. 
1698. Oreomyrrhis, from Titiokura: comp. with Nos. 1601, 1606. 
1699. Friesia: perhaps F. ovata, No. 290. 
1700. Scrap of a small, low, bushy Coprosma, from Titiokura; near, and perhaps, distinct from linariifolia, No.         .
1701. Pratia, fruit only, shaded spot, nr. Titiokura. 
1702. Pterostylis – near ditto. 
1703. Orchis – near ditto. 
1704. Grass, Titiokura. 
1705. Uncinia distans W.C., – Titiokura. 
1706. Hydrocotyle, low shaded woods, nr. Titiokura. 
1707. Another little Grass, Titiokura. 
1708. Gentian; downs, Mohaka. 
1709. Geophila? from Titiokura. 
1710. Epilobium, 	d——
1711. Exarrhena saxosa, W.C., crags, Titiokura. 
1712. Juncus? same crags. 
1713. Myrtus pedunculata, tree, 20 feet, heights above R. Mohaka. 
1714. Myrtus parvifolia, W.C., slender diffuse, tree, woods, near Tarawera; 8-9 feet. Petalis venosis, &c – perhaps, but a var. of 1713.?
1715. Grass, from Mohaka downs. 
1716. Carpodetus – a scrap indeed! from heights near Tarawera, I gathered it in travelling, believing it to be C. serratus, but it will I think be found to be a distinct sp. – C. adpressa W.C. Tree, 12-16 feet, ramulis densely pilose, leaves hirsute adpressed. 
1717. Azorella? from highest summits of Ruahine range. Compare with 1695. A. laxa, W.C. 
1718. Veronica, a little lovely sp. from the summit of Ruahine. V. minima, W.C. 
[V. lyallii]
1719. Myosotis divergens, W.C. – a little sp. from nr. summit; calex curiously cleft and diverging, flowers single, not axillary. But – compare with M. simplex No.      , last lot. 
1720. Flowers picked up in forest, supposed to be Passiflora tetrandra. 
1721. Small creeping Grass, from nr. top. 
1722. Alga, in holes in stones, under water, stream nr. Patea. 
1723. Arthropodium, sides R. Makororo, scarce. 
1724. Scrap of a Drymaria? from summit. 
1725. Lagenophora reticulata, W.C., from ditto. A var. of 1630? 
[L. petiolata]
1726. Hymenophyllum villosum, woods. 
1727. Epilobium obtusifolium, top. 
1728. Pimelea, near top; low, straggling shrub. 
1729. Juncus, growing in dense clumps, in snow runs, summit. 
1730. Suttonia divaricata, summit, with Jungermanniæ & Lichens, – compare with No. 1630. 
1731. Minute glaucous grass, summit. 
1732. Composit. from Patea village: a very favorite plant with the Natives, who wear it around their necks, for its scent! They call it Roniu. Bellis Novæ Zealandiæ, W.C. 
1733. Myosotis glandulosis, W.C., a n. sp. from dry crags, in a plain between Raukawa and the Ruataniẁa. 
1734. Oxalis, white, from summit. 
1735. A prize! a little fern from top of crags; growing with 1598. I cannot refer it to any genus which I am acquainted with. 
1736. Gleichenia procera, n. sp., W.C., from open hills, Tararua range. I have seen some odd specimens 5 times branched. 
[G. circinata]
1737. Hymenophyllum flabellatum, (probably,) Trees, Tararua. 
[H. flabellatum]
1738. Thelymitra montana, W.C., fine sp., clayey hills, Tararua. 
[T. longifolia]
1739. Microtis, from ditto. 
1740. Dendrobium, ditto; Epiphytical, on large trees. A sp. apparently near D. biflorum, certainly distinct from D. Cunninghamianum; – D. Tararuense, W.C. 
1741. Grammatis exudatum. (vide No.    sent before), Tararua. 
1742. Pterostylis graminifolia, W.C., – growing with 1738, & 1739. 
[P. graminea]
1743. Hymenophyllum macrocarpum, W.C., woods, Tararua range – valves, large, crested, open, under frond. 
1744. Something quite new to me. From a small Tree; 12-14 feet, in a dense swamp called Kaitara, in the midst of Wairarapa Valley where I nearly lost my life. 
1745. Rubus; forming dense bushes, W. side of Wairarapa. 
[R. schmidelioides]
1746. Scrap of a little Umbelliferous plant, dry stony plains, Wairarapa. 
1747. Jungermannia, from water holes, forest, Wairarapa. 
1748. Myriophyllum, (scrap)	d——	d——
1749. Fagus rotundifolia, W.C. – monœcious; nucules, gummy; shining; fine tree; 40-50 feet, hills, Tararua range. I send you all my specimens. 
[F. fusca]
1750. Earina, perhaps a n. sp. Sepals, lanceolate acuminate: ditto. 
[E. mucronata]
1751. Parsonsia, terminal in flores. – ditto. 
1752. Hedicaria paniculata, W.C., small tree, 20-25 feet, margins of woods, E. base Tararua range. 
1753. Clematis, a graceful plant; W. side of Wairarapa. 
[C. colensoi]
1754. Ranunculus Wairarapense, W.C., – a peculiar spreading species (patentissima!) from that valley. 
1755. Loranthus puberescens, W.C., trees, Tararua. 
[L. tetrapetalus]
1756. Dichondra, smooth-leaved, – plains, Wairarapa. 
1757. Small, weak grass, watery spots;      d——
[Poa imbecilla]
1758. Pimelea (nr. virgata) shrub, 2-3 feet, thickets, &c. 
[P. virgata]
1759. Plagianthus, (fæm.) fine tree, 40-50 feet; Wairarapa. 
1760. Myrtus obcordata, var., – scarcely a distinct sp., yet, calyces very pubescent, peduncles longer, & round leaves ciliated, &c. from Wairarapa. 
[M. obcordata]
1761. Hymenophyllum pulcherrimum, var., involucres nearly terminal. Woods, Tararua. 
1762. Lindsæa, hills, Tararua. 
[L. trichomanoides]
1763. Epiphytical Orchid (nr. Earina,) – from valley, W. side of Tararua range, – a sp. of this genus sent before; but this sp. appears to be distinct, leaves being much longer, &c. –
1764. Callixene parviflora, doubtless; – just another habitat; Tararua. –
1765. Gleichenia, advanced with doubt as a new sp., certainly having affinity with G. acutifolia & G. Cunningham; wanting, however, the scales, hair and coriaceous texture of G. Cunningh., Sori, too, nearer margin, & margin sub-revolute: wanting aristate scales & ferruginous hair of G. acutifolia; but we need better specimens. From woods, valley of the “Hutt”. Compare with No. 147, lot per Mr. Busby. –  Gleichenia intermedia, W.C. 
[G. cunninghamii]
1766. Lycopodium Tararuense, W.C., a species near L. flagellaria, but, I believe, distinct. Trees, forests, Tararua ranges. 
[L. varium]
1767. Fagus ——, male sps., fine tree, hills, Tararua; perianth not pubescent but resiniferous. 
[F. fusca]
1768. Panax exsertum n. sp., W.C., a shrubby tree, 12-15 feet, Tararua. 
1769. A climbing Metrosideros, woods, Tararua; certainly distinct from both M. diffusa and M. florida. 
1770. Lycopodium, ground, creeping; hills, Tararua. 
1771. Androstoma ciliafera, rambling bushes, 1 foot high, open hills, Tararua. Compare with Taupo species in last lot. 
1772. Leucopogon, bushes, 3-4 feet; from ditto. Jungermannia on same. 
[L. fasculatus]
1773. Fagus		Tararua. 
[F. fusca]
1774. Fagus elliptica, W.C., Tararua. 
[F. solandri]
1775. Dracophyllum, a shrub or sm tree, 5-7 feet; doubtless a very distinct species, though not in flower. D. vaginatum, W.C. 
1776. Laurelia N. Zealandiæ, A. Cunn., male sps, woods, valley of Hutt. 
1777. Hemitelia Novæ Zealandiæ, W.C., part of a broken frond found on ground in the road. – ascent Tararua. 
[Alsophylla colensoi]
  1777α. What I believe to be the young incipient frondlets of the same, sprouting from an old lopped caudex forming a bridge over a ravine: caudex black, 8 feet long. 
1778. Clematis, large leaved sp., plant small, on ground. Ascent, Tararua, Compare with 1653. My only sp. 
1779. Sps. from an Eugenia, perhaps E. maire? small tree, swampy spots, Wairarapa. 
[E. maire]
1780. Incipient fronds sprouting from a prostrate (felled) caudex, side of road. Caudex 9 feet long. Cyathea pulcherissima, W.C. 
1781. Lycopodium viscidum? Sides of road, valley of Hutt. [Hypolepsis distans]
  1781. (bis.) ?Cheilanthes distans, W.C., from ditto. I sent a fern very like this to A. Cunningham; from Hokianga, Westn. Coast. (Hypolep. distans, Hook.)
1782. Asplenium Forsterianum?? From woods, Tararua: I have but one. 
1783. Fagus, from nr. top of Tararua; trees 25-35 feet. 
[F. solandri]
1784. Metrosideros, (nr. M. buxifolia) flowers axillary; climbing trees, thickets, Cook’s Straits. – Comp. with No. 1979. 
[M. scandens]
1785. Coprosma exigua, n. sp., W.C. a small, slender shrub, 3-5 feet. 
1786. Friesia ovala, (see, No. 290), thickets, Wairarapa, see, also, No. 1699. 
[A specimen of Carex solandri inexplicably bears this number]
1787. Alga? Stream of water nr. Te Kaikokirikiri village, Wairarapa. 
1788. sps. of a plant growing in dense beds under water with preceding. 
1789. Geranium, from Wairarapa; calyx very aristate, but, perhaps, G. retrorsum? 
[G. dissectum var. australe]
1790. Creeping Composit., rivers side, Wairarapa. 
[Raoulia tenuicaulis]
1791. Pterostylis, bog, Wairarapa
1792. Aspidium, perhaps vestitum?
1793. Nephrodium.	) from Hurunuiorangi,
1794. Asplenium. 	) Wairarapa. 
[A. hookerianum]
1795. Pennantia, flg. specimens, unexpanded. (See, No. 286)
1796. Elæodendron? small, slender tree, 8-10 ft., wood, Te Kaikokirikiri. 
1797. Small, linear leaved Olive in fruit, Hurunuiorangi. 
[Olea montana]
1798. Olea, Large tree; certainly different from O. apetala, of which I have no description: woods, Wairarapa. 
1799. Parsonsia, (for a drawing if you want one), woods, Hurunuiorangi. 
1800. Coprosma, slender tree, 6-8 feet, ditto. 
1801. Melicope simplex, from Okahu, Wairarapa; shewing the villous epicarp A.C., the first time I have noticed it. 
1802. Lycopodium (volubile? of which I have no descript.), from clayey hills, Port Nicholson. 
1803. Small bushy Cordyline, (n. sp.) hills nr. Port Nicholson, Quite pleased with this plant. 
1804. From Cape Turakirae, at length splendidly in flower. 
1805. Pimelea, Porangahau, Cook’s Straits; shrub, 1-2 feet. 
1806. A little umbellif? plant, sides of rocky cliffs, Port Nicholson, quite patent in soil, no flower; but plant new to me. 
1807. Fagus Solandri, Hills, Port Nicholson. 
1808. Dendrobium saxosum, W.C., rocks at Turakirae. I had long passed this, believing it to be D. Cunningh., but now I think it to be very distinct. 
[D. cunninghamii]
1809. Leucopogon compacta, W.C., dense bushes 2-2½ feet high; Hills, Port Nicholson. 
[L. fasciculatus]
1810. Coprosma vaginans, W.C., Shrub, 4-5 feet, skirts of thickets, Hills, Port Nicholson: a sp. very near C. propinqua. 
1811. C. grandiflora, W.C., a sp. bearing large yellow flowers; difficult to get good specimens from its growing on a very exposed place, hills, Port Nicholson (sent before). 
[Coprosma foetidissima]
1812. Cyathodes, from ditto. 
1813. Cardamine, minute species, shaded spots, cliffs, nr. Porangahau. 
1814. Libertia littoralis, W.C., slopes, shores, Waimarara, Palliser Bay. 
1815. Composit., small scarce shrub, 2-3 feet, same locality. 
1816. Uncinia graminifolia, W.C., from ditto. 
1817. Arthropodium, dark spotted leaves, sandy spots, Turakirae. 
1818. Pterostylis, wood, Waimarara. 
[P. banksii]
1819. Drymaria, from shores, Port Nicholson. 
1820. Galium		ditto
1821. Geranium, 	Wellington )  	both probably
1822. Composit.,	Turakirae	   )  	immigrants
1823. Urtica, shrubby, 4-6 feet high, from Pahiatua, near the R. Manawatu: See, No. 297. 
1824. Composit., grassy spots, Te Hawera village. 
1825. Small Urticeous? plant; alluvial banks, nr. R. Manawatu. 
[Australina pusilla]
1826. Isolepis? muddy flat, Pahiatua. 
1827. Drymaria, crags, on hills, nr. ditto. 
1828. Coprosma, from marshes, Pahiatua: Jungermannia, on.
1829. Rubus, large dense bushes, ditto. 
[R. schmidelioides]
1830. Plagianthus, male & fem. sps., Trees, 25-36 feet, Te H. 
1831. Parsonsia, long linear leaves: ditto. 
1832. Exarrhena longistylis, W.C.	)  thickets,
1833. Myosotis, (See, 1719.)	         	)  nr. Puehutai. 
[M. spathulata]
1834. Hymenophyllum flexuosum, forest, nr. Te Hawera. 
1835. Earina longicaulis, W.C., n. sp., 3 feet long, few leaves, pendant on trees, woods, between Te Hautotara and Eparaima; interior. 
[E. mucronata]
1836. Pimelea, shrub, 1-2 feet. 
[P. virgata]
1837. Elæocarpus pokaka, W.C., at length obtained in flower, from Te Waipukurau: vide, Nos. 413, 1107. 
[E. hookerianus]
1838. Ditto, from Wairarapa: vide, No. 361. 
[E. hookerianus]
1839. Elæocarpus sinuatus, W.C., another n. sp., Tree 35-45 feet, leaves membranaceous, Te Kaikokirikiri; Vide No. 1649. 
[E. hookerianus]
1840. Loranthus? on Melicope simplex?, near Puehutai. 
[L. micranthus]
1841. Tillæa, large bushy tufts, dry hills, near Eparaima. 
1842. Small Tree, from swamp, nr. Eparaima. 
1843. Rubus aphylla, W.C., – at last in flower: perhaps 2 sp. here mixed: growing with preceeding. 
1844. Small Carex, plains. nr. Te Waipukurau. 
[C. virgata]
1845. Carmichælia juncoides, W.C., small new sp., plain near Mission Station, Hawkes Bay; grows in beds!
1846. Dracophyllum, from hills, nr. shore, Pahawa, E. Coast; shrub, 4-6 feet, – D. rectum, W.C. 
1847. Viola, peduncle 1 foot long! growing with 1842. 
[V. cunninghamii]
1848. Orchid., grassy plains, nr. Te Waipukurau: perhaps 2 species? 
[Prasophyllum colensoi]
1849. Cardamine, from Puehutai. 
1850. Chrysobactron Hookerianum, garden specimen; much smaller than those growing wild. 
1851. Oxalis, garden specimen: (See, No. 1734; same sp.)
1852. Elatine? wet spots, thickets, Eparaima. 
1853. Acianthus (rivularis?), bogs, near Station. 
1854. Epilobium	)
1855. Galium	)  from a swamp near Mission Station. 
1856. Mazus, grassy plains, Pukekura, nr. Eparaima. 
[M. pumilio]
1857. Celmisia, (scrap,)	ditto. 
1858. Thelymitra, fine sp. 	ditto. 
[T. longifolia]
1859. Asplenium scariosum, W.C., dry hills, woods, between Eparaima and R. Manawatu. 
1860. Libertia, forest nr. Te Hawera. 
1861. Wahlenbergia trifida, W.C., barren plains, head of Wairarapa Valley. 
[W. gracilis]
1862. Epilobium, small, creeping, sp.,		ditto. 
1863. Composit., little creeping plant, head of Ruamahanga river (see, No. 1790). 
1864. Viscum. 
1865. Cyperaceæ? 
[Schœnus apogon]
1866. Oreomyrrhis, from Wairarapa; remarkably long pedicels; but, comp. with Nos. 1601, 1606. 
1867. Fagus, growing same woods as 1859; perianth not villous. 
1868. Metrosideros, forest bet. Te Kaikokirikiri & Te Hawera; comp. with Nos. 1650, 1676. 
[M. hypericifolia]
1869. Thelymitra, growing with 1861; diffg. from T. Forsteri: T. gracilis, W.C. 
[T. longifolia]
1870. Microtis??, growing with preceding; exam. this well; only 2 sps. found. 
1871. Luzula, very villus,		ditto. 
1872. Hedycaria, for exam. 
1873. White Gnaphalium. 
1874. Composit., small shrub, 2-3 feet high, boggy spots, Wairarapa. 
1875. Uncinia carinata, W.C., woods, head of Wairarapa valley. 
[U. cæspitosa]
1876. Metrosideros, climbing,	ditto. 
[M. florida]
1877. Alseuosmia, in fl. at last! (Se, No. 1111.) forest, nr. Te Hawera. 
1878. Edwardsia, flowers, from head of Wairarapa; (See, No. 752.)
1879. Elæocarpus: a sp. from forest brought for exam. – I am in doubt, whether it be really distinct from E. Hinau. Its leaves are more apiculate (sub-cuspidate), racemes & calyces very sericeous, and fruit globular: E. sericeus? W.C. 
1880. Jungermannia, on living trees, same forest: elagantissime!
1881. Polypodium rufus-villosum? W.C. – this may, after all, prove to be a var. of P. viscidum. 
1882. Good sps of Aspidium Cunninghamianum, for yr. herb. Forest, between Wairarapa & R. Manawatu: & so, also, 3 preceding. 
1883. Polypodium elegans, W.C. – same woods. I gathered this, believing it to be P. sylvaticum, but now, on exam., I consider it to be a distinct sp., though closely allied. If, however, you should consider it identical, I hope it will prove to Dr. Joseph, that my P. sylvaticum is not an Aspidium, which he, in his remarks on Aspidium venustum, has been pleased to consider it. 
1884. Trichomanes; trunks of living trees, same forests. I consider this distinct from “venosum”; that is “uniflorus” & has its receptacle sunk in the frond. But I have sent you this before: T. pendulum, W.C. 
[T. venosum]
1885. Scrap of a Pteris, from same woods: distinct from P. Brunoniana (-um??)
1886. Dicksonia, from Te Hawera; having affinity with D. squarrosa, but, I think, distinct. Pinnæ almost caudate, and pennules and segments more distant; a most beautiful plant. Caudex 12-15 feet. D. formosa? W.C. 
[D. squarrosa]
1887. Dicksonia, another arborescent sp. from same locality; – which I think new. A sp. between D. squarrosa, & D. fibrosa, – Caudex stout, bulky, 6-9 feet. D. intermedia, W.C. which I think new. 
[D. squarrosa]
1888. My specimens of this fine Parasite, detected at last! splendidly flowering in the forest, head of Ruamahunga River, and all but ruined with damp. 
1889. Pittosporum, flg. sps., heights, Cape Kidnapper. 
1890. Composit., shrubby herb, sandy shores, E. Coast. 
[Vittadinia australis]
1891. Hydrocotyle-like, a scrap, scarcely in flower, from Ngapihao, E. Coast. 
1892. Ranunculus, small, low grounds, nr. Cape Turnagain. 
[R. rivularis]
1893. Pimelea, shrubby low plant, Akitio, E. Coast. 
1894. Senecio, procumbent, ascending; from ditto. 
1895. Luzula, small	ditto. 
[L. campestris var. migrata]
1896. Plantago, fleshy species, sandy soil & rocky cliffs, Pahawa, E. Coast. 
1897. Composit., small creeping plant, growing with 1892. 
1898. Gnaphalium, an elegant sp., which I hope may prove new: E. Coast. 
1899. Ranunculus sarmentosus, W.C., a pretty little filiform species, wet spots, Pahawa. 
1900. Oxalis minima, W.C., growing with preceding. 
1901. Viola,		ditto. 
1902. Hydrocotyle nitens, W.C., small, glabrous sp., Cape Palliser. 
1903. Geranium, rocky spots, E. Coast, in tufts. 
1904. Cardamine, Castle Point, E. Coast. 
1905. Little plant, sides of cliffs, Cape Palliser. 
[Gypsophila tubulosa]
1906. Pterostylis latifolia, W.C., hill sides, Cape Palliser. A truly elegant species when fresh. Flowers not unlike those of P. concinna. Journal. Bot. Tab CXXXVI., leaves thickish, succulent when fresh. Unforty. my sps. are all damaged. 
[P. foliata]
1907. Lagenophora rotundifolia? W.C., advanced with hesitation to be a n. sp.; – from shores, nr. Castle Point. 
1908. Ranunculus, shady spots, shores, E. Coast. 
1909. Hydrocotyle, minute, glabrous, from a glen, nr. Oroi, E. Coast. 
1910. Minute plant, from Cape Palliser. Tillea tenella purpurata. 
1911. Gaultheria from Castle Point; shrub 2 feet: very scarce on this Coast.
1912. Ranunculus Oroiense, W.C. a peculiar hairy scape species; villous under leaves, on veins, &c. Bog, nr. Oroi, E. Coast. 
[R. rivularis]
1913. Pterostylis, from nr. ditto. 
1914. Notholæna? growing with 1909. 
1915. Juncæ?		d——
1916. Libertia. Woods, Coast, nr. Waraurangi. 
1917. Little, membranaceous, glabrous, Galium, do. 
1918. Scrap of a Mniarum from Ngapihao, diffg. I think, from M. biflorum: M. serrulatum, W.C. 
1919. Ranunculus tuberosus, W.C. growing with 1907. But comp. with 1912; & see No. 196, sent. 
1920. Linear-lanceolate Ophioglossum; E. Coast. 
1921. Edwardsia, Rocks, Cape Palliser. 
1922. Clematis, thickets, ditto: a pretty sp. 
1923. Convolvulus, small leaved, twining, creeping: identical with same sent you in first lot from Bay Islands. 
[Fuchsia procumbens]
1924. Sps. of a bushy shrub, 2 feet high, from Cape Palliser; which may be a 2nd species of this genus sent you. 
[Hymenanthera crassifolia]
1925. Epilobium, a graceful plant, between Pitoone & Wellington. 
[E. rotundifolium]
1926. Composit. (Macrorhyncus?) small species, plains, head of Wairarapa Valley; certainly distinct from larger species from this place, & from Poverty Bay. 
[Microseris forsteri]
1927. Misandra? from near Te Hautotara Village. 
1928. Ranunculus translucens, W.C. (scrap only but anon) from deep water course; near Cape Turnagain. (not recognizable JDH)
1929. Jungermannia	)
1930. Ditto		)  wet logs, woods. 
1931. Myosotis calycina, W.C. a little gem! a sp. very near Dr. Joseph’s M. Antarctica; very scarce, among mosses, glen, nr. Oroi. 
1932. Oxalis, small, creeping, sp., alluvial banks of a river, nr. Eparaima. 
[O. corniculata var. ciliifera]
1933. Clematis, scrap, from	ditto. 
1934. Thelymitra, scrap,	ditto. 
[T. longifolia]
1935. Galium		ditto: compare with No. 1832. 
1936. Exarrhena, ditto. Compare with No. 1832
[Myosotis petiolata]
1937. Gnaphalium, from banks of R. Manawatu. 
[G. subrigidum]
1938. Gymnogramma ceterachoides, W.C., dark holes, cliffs, Cook’s Straits. Very scarce. I refer it with doubt to Gymnogramma. 
1939. Gymnogramma Palliserense, W.C., from grassy spots about Cape Palliser. Very nearly allied to G. Novæ-Zealandiæ, but that is much smaller, sori more dense, segments cutine, &c. 
1940. Ranunculus, high table land, Okorewa, Palliser Bay. 
[R. rivularis]
1941. Asplenium petiolatum, W.C., cliffs, Parangarahu, Cook’s Straits. 
[A. hookerianum]
1942. Composit., small creeping Plant, stony spots, Turakirae. 
1943. Hydrocotyle, small glabrous sp., with echinated fruit, from glen, nr. Oroi, E. Coast. 
1944. Cyrtostylis ?macrophylla, W.C., heights, nr. Cape Turnagain. 
1945. Caladenia glandulosis, W.C., from Castle Point: only 3 specimens found. Very near the Bay of Islands species. 
1946. Jungermannia, stones, road to Wellington. 
1947. Moss? from wet woods, nr. ditto. 
1948. Orchids. – I have only 3 sps., I send two. Comp. with 1848. 
1949. Drymaria, large leaves, long peduncles; dry hills, woods, bet. Te Hautotara & Eparaima: comp. with 1827. 
1950. Little weak Tillæa, rocky spots, Cape Palliser. T. debilis, W.C. 
1951. Galium Tararuense, W.C., a pretty little moss like species from base of Tararua mountain range. 
1952. Jungermannia (scrap), with preceding. 
1953. Cardamine, small	ditto. 
1954. Hydrocotyle, d——	d——
1955. Oxalis, white, Wairarapa (sent before). 
[O. magellanica]
1956. Lindsæa australis W.C., (confirmed) from hills, Tararua: see, No. 1133, last lot. 
1957. Orchid. Epiphyte – of which I have 2 leaves and 2 racemes of flowers – which I divide with you. This is like some I sent you from the Bay of Islands, (Sarcochilus falcata?) but the flowers are smaller and leaves larger. From Wairarapa. 
1958. Ophioglossum minimum, W.C., plains, Hurunuiorangi. 
1959. Pterostylis, all I have, 2 sps., from head of Wairarapa valley: but compare with 1906. 
1960. Pterostylis, from ditto: perhaps same as 1742. 
[P. graminea]
1961. Oxalis pellucidus, W.C., wood, near Eparaima: see No. 1097, last lot. 
[O. corniculata var. ciliifera]
1962. Another pretty little Oxalis, grassy spots, Puehutai. 
1963. Little labiate plant, spotted leaves, large flowers; growing with No. 1951. 
1964. Hymenophyllum rarum?, trees, Tararua. 
[H. rarum]
1965. Hymenophyllum dorsum, W.C., – a sp. near H. multifidum, but I think distinct: trees, Tararua. 
1966. Grammatis, in beds on the ground! heights, near Port Nicholson heads. Sori confluent, generally confined to upper part of frond. In case. 
[Polypodium australe]
1967. Grammatis, on logs & roots, high up mountain forests, never on the ground. Sori more linear than preceding sp., distinct falcate; fronds larger, margin slightly repand. These may be distinct: but I dare not at present say. 
[Polypodium australe]
1968. Viscum heterophyllum, W.C., a fine n. sp., woods, head of Ruamahanga river. 
1969. Eliocarpus, see, No. 1879. 
1970. Cardamine, large species, wood, Te Kaikokirikiri. 
1971. Carmichælia pilosa, W.C., from hills near Pahawa river. Shrub, 3-5 feet high, branches & legume densely sericeo-pilose. 
1972. Coprosma brachiata, W.C., graceful, slender shrub, 3-4 feet, bearing large, orange coloured, edible berries; Wairarapa. 
1973. Euphrasia elegans, W.C., a truly elegant species, and well worthy of a place in our English Gardens: shrubby, 2-2½ feet, hill-side thickets, head of R. Ruamahanga. 
[E. cuneata]
1974. Myosotis infrapetiolatis, W.C., growing with 1970. A species near M. divergens, No. 1719, but a much larger plant, with habit of 1637. Compare with No. 1833. 
[M. spathulata]
1975. Orchid. Epiphyte, on trees, at R. Mangatawainui. Compare with same species No. 1763.
1976. Coprosma filiformis, W.C., shrub or small tree, 8-12 feet high, with very slender, long, drooping branches, bearing large white berries: thickets, banks of R. Pahawa. 
[C. rubra]
1977. Veronica, a lovely sp., shrub 2-3 feet, from Ohaua, Cook’s Straits. [V. parviflora]
  1977α. (bis.) Veronica apiculata, W.C., slender tree, 10-14 feet, from Oterango, Cook’s Straits: leaves apiculated, apices canaliculated. 
1978. Lobelia, from Ohaua, Cook’s Straits, 2 feet high, large bushes. A species near L. alata, but, I think, distinct. 
[L. anceps]
1979. Metrosideros rotundifolia, W.C., climbing, sub-bracteate, thickets, Cook’s Straits: near to M. buxifolia; comp. with 1784. 
[M. scandens]
1980. Suttonia divaricata? var. γ. fruiticosa, small tree, near Hurunuiorangi, 12-14 feet. This may be a difft. sp. from S. divaricata. Leaves more rotund, scarcely emarginate, fruit corymb-racemose sometimes 7-9 on short raceme; which falls off in gathering & handling. Compare with No. 1630. 
1981. Lindsæa: I still dare to believe this to be distinct from the little Northern species, L. discolor. 
1982. Small grass, shores, Cook’s Straits. 
1983. Lomaria marina, W.C., cliffs, ditto; rather plentiful. 
1984. Euphrasia foliata, W.C., a peculiar shrubby species, bearing a multitude of small leaves; 1-1½ feet, E. Coast. 
[E. cuneata]
1985. Oxalis, shores, Cook’s Straits, near Waiariki. 
1986. Small grass	from ditto. 
[Deyeuxia forsteri var. humilior]
1987. Scrap of a Lucerne? – plentifully on shores, Cook’s Straits; doubtless introduced. 
1988. Cheilanthes? dark green, elegant species: grassy spots, E. Coast. 
[C. sieberi]
1989. Hymenophyllum – having close affinity with H. scabrum, of which it may be a var. – but, it has receptacle sometimes exserted and involucres didymous & much dentate; a very much larger plant, more viscid, and pinnules greatly elongated. If it is but a var., it is a beautiful one. Trees, forests, nr. Te Hawera. H. elongatum, W.C. 
[H. scabrum]
1990. Metrosideros, in fruit; see, No. 1650, and also, M. pendens, & comp. 
1991. Hymenophyllum Frankliniarum. I hope you will yet find evidence enough to enable you to receive this witness’ testimony. I have never seen a green, (aeruginosum) one. Growing with 1967. 
1992. Scrap of a Veronica, small shrub 2-4 feet, thickets, heights, nr. Wellington. 
1993. Curious plant, growing under water at Herehere, plains, Ahuriri; excessively fragile. 
1994. Frondose Jungermannia. 
1995. Pteris rotundifolia, var. oblongifolia, W.C., a fine variety from dry woods nr. Te Hawera. 
1996. Polypodium Billardieri, var. longistipa, W.C., dry woods near Mangatawainui. 
1997. Lomaria exigua, W.C., woods, nr. Te Hawera; this species can not easily be confounded on account of its peculiar habit; it grows in beds, fronds remarkably distant from each other; some fronds are a foot & more longer than the specimens. 
1998. Polypodium attenuatum, clay banks, woods, nr. Wellington. 
1999. Nephrodium glabellum? Water course nr. Ohaua, Cook’s Straits. 
2000. Adiantum Busbyanum, W.C., a truly elegant species, which has pleased me much. I dedicate it to my old friend, (and the kind friend & host of Cunningham who also, introduced the Vine to N. Zealand,) James Busby Esq., late British Resident. The largest of all the Adiant., yet possessing the smallest sori. From alluvial banks, River Mangatainoka. 
2001. Nephrodium, skirts of woods, overhanging; Wellington. Bad specs: place being frequented by cows. N. australis, W.C. 
2002. Adiantum rotundifolium, W.C., grassy spots near Pahawa. A sp. belonging to the same section of Adiantæ as 2 which I formerly sent you; 1, A. assimile, from Bay of Islands, 1, from Manukau; but distinct, I believe, from either. 
2003. Alga? covering ground in dense masses, wet low woods, near Te Hawera. 
2004. Scrap: minute Jungermannia, with ditto. 
2005. Hymenophyllum Revolutum; pardon me, for not yet consenting to call this H. Tunbridgensis: forests. 
2006. Myrtus bullata, var. Thickets, Wairarapa: not blistered like the Northern species, and leaves smaller, &c. 
2007. Pimelea, bushy shrub, 1-2 feet, Turakirae. 
2008. Myrtus pedunculata? var. macrophylla, W.C., small tree, woods, E. Coast: but compare with No. 1714. 
2009. Scrap of a Weinmannia, fine tree, 30-40 feet, head of R. Ruamahanga. 
2010. Scrap of a Polygonum, for exam. 
[Muehlenbeckia australis]
2011. Leptospermum Pahawense, W.C., – a handsome tree, 20-30 feet, in gorge of River Pahawa; capsule 4 cleft, peduncles glabrous. 
[L. ericoides]
2012. Leptospermum, from ditto, elagant tree, 14-20 feet high, capsule 5 cleft, peduncles pilose, &c. 
[L. ericoides]
2013. Composit. shrub Haxtonia? from ditto, 10-12 feet high. 
2014. Lichen; on leaf of ditto. 
2015. Composit., small plant, growing in dense tufts; sandy cliffs, Cook’s Straits. 
2016. Coprosma palæformis, W.C., dense bushy shrub, 4-5 feet high studded with claret colored berries; Hurunuiorangi. 
2017. Lomaria membranacea, W.C., growing with 1997: a species very distinct from L. lanceolata. But, sent before?
2018. Hoheria punctata, W.C., handsome tree, 20-25 feet, banks R. Manawatu. 
[H. populnea]
2019. Galium racemosum, W.C., a much branched erect sp., growing plentifully among stony debris of cliffs, Cape Palliser. 
[G. umbrosum]
2020. Panax, from thickets on R. Pahawa; small tree, 12-14 feet, fruit large white, spotted: diffg. I think from P. anomalum. 
2021. Chenopodium? shores, E. Coast. 
[C. pusillum]
2022. Leucopodium, (flagellaria?) woods nr. Te Hawera. 
[L. billardieri]
2023. Galium, low lanceolate leaves. 
[G. tenuicaula]
2024. Hoheria, from Manawatu. 
[H. populnea var. lanceolata]
2025. Acianthus saxatilis, W.C., on rocks among moss, Turakirae, flowering in April & May; flowers much larger and leaves more membranaceous than in A. folio-bractus. 
[A. sinclairii]
2026. Acianthus folio-bractus? – glen, nr. Oroi. 
[A. sinclairii]
2027. Azorella? large purple fruit; heights near Ẁareama; compare with 1695 & 1717. 
[A. trifoliolata]
2028. Small, unexpanded Libertia, woods. 
2029. Discaria, from dry stony plains, Wairarapa: D. procumbens, W.C. 
[D. toumatou]
2030. Discaria from sandy shores, E. Coast near Castle Point; leaves larger than in preceding, perianth pubescent; low, diffuse shrub, 1-2 feet: D. pubescens, W.C. But compare both with No. 49, Journal, from Turanga, of which species I have none at hand. 
[D. toumatou]
2031. Gnaphalium, hills above Puehutai. 
2032. Olea angustifolia, W.C., small slender tree, 5-25 feet, woods; a sp. near O. linearis, from Wairarapa; vide, Nos. 711, & 1119. 
[O. montana]
2033. Olea montana, W.C., small tree, branches & petioles densely feruginous tomentose, 15 feet; high ridges, Patea village. 
[O. montana]
2034. Olea lanceolata, W.C., graceful tree, 20-30 feet, woods, nr. Te Hawera; bearing a profusion of fruit in dense panicles. 
[O. lanceolata]
2035. Olea excelsa, W.C., a large tree, on banks of rivers, bearing a smaller fruit than No. 2034: I have but a poor sp. of this. 
[O. lanceolata]
2036. Two leaves of another Olea yet to be noticed, from wood near Te Hawera. The Tree was a young one whence I obtained them but I think they will prove to belong to another species. O. longipetala, W.C. There is yet another species, perhaps, already sent, a larger tree than any here mentioned, with coriaceous leaves and larger fruit, more like O. apetala. All are apetalous. An proprium genus? 
[O. lanceolata]
2037. Adiantum platyphyllum, W.C., from banks of river, Omoekau, Palliser Bay: a sp. near A. longissimum; No. 1670. 
[A. affine]
2038. Carmichælia juncoides, fruiting specimens; see No. 1845. 
[C. juncea]
2039. Restiaceæ? minute wiry plant, from Okokoro, delta, Ahuriri. 
2040. Hydrocotyle, small sp. (H. biflorum, W.C.) from ditto. 
2041. Little lanceolate leaved, glabrous plant, growing with foregoing. 
2042. Coprosma hispida, W.C., a very curious little species with its long persistent corolla & styles, and almost echinated fruit: from Okokoro; and from head Wairarapa Valley. 
[Nertera setulosa]
2043. A fern, which I venture to deem a Cassebeera? It seems to be almost intermediate between that Genus and Pteris. C. australis, W.C., from thickets, sides of cliffs, Kaiku, Cape Kidnapper. 
[Pteris tremula]
2044. Examine & compare this fern – whether differing from Polypodium pustulatum, as it is a fragrant species, and used by the Natives to scent oil, food. &c. Forests, Te Hawera. 
[Polypodium pustulatum]   [a specimen of Adiantum affine also bears this number, but see 2045, 2046]
2045. Small Coriaceous Adiantum, among moss, wet rocks, road to Wellington & elsewhere. 
[see 2044]
2046. Small Adiantum, woods. 
[see 2044]
2047. Small filiform Apium (or Petroselinum), from nr. Raukawa. 
2048. Luzula, from near ditto. 
2049. Hydrocotyle, from banks of R. Ngaruroro. 
[H. asiatica]
2050. Cyathea, arborescent, from Te Hawera. 
2051. Ditto	d——	d——
2052. Composit. scrap of an Herb, from Wairarapa. 
2053. Large Grass, woods, nr. summit of Ruahine range. 
2054. Large Grass; from woods, half way up Ruahine. 
2055. Arthropodium graminifolium, W.C., from garden (sent before). 
2056. Aciphylla grandis, leaves only: young leaves circinnate, like ferns; some leaves much larger than these. See two, male & fem., specimens in separate paper. From summit, Ruahine. Vide, Nos. 1528, & 81. 
  2056α. Ditto. 
2057. Conferva? on Typha, from a deep watercourse, 4 feet under water, near R. Mangaonuku. 
2058. Antennaria? on Coprosma; woods, Ruahine. 
2059. Stereocaulon, stones, summit of Ruahine. 
2060. Jungermannia, ground, 		ditto. 
2061. Jungermannia, d——		d——
2062. Lichen, trees		d——
2063. Jungermannia,	d——)
2064. Ditto, very minute,	d——)  	on Hymenophyllum
2065. Ditto, fine,		d——)
2066. Moss, ground,	d—— 
2067. Marchantia ramentacea, W.C., banks of R. Tuaraiawa. 
2068. Marchantia			from ditto. 
2069. Alga? on & among Mosses, summits of Ruahine. 
2070. Marchantia, banks stream, W. base of Ruahine (see 2067)
2071. Stereocaulon, small scarce sp. on rocks, R. Ẁakaurekou. 
2072. Ditto,		             on d——	do——
2073. Ditto,		             on d——	d——
2074. Moss,		             on d——	d——
2075. Marchantia capillaris, W.C.? on ground, in wood hill nr. Patea. 
2076. Jungermannia, on ground, among grass, nr. top Ruahines. 
2077. (missing in original)
2078. Ditto,			d——	d——
2079. Ditto,			d——	d——
2080. Lichen 	 from crags, on summit. 
2081. Forstera, good lumps, from top: same as No. 1595. 
[Phyllachne colensoi]
2082. Lichen, (?) on dead branch of Tree, wood, ascent. 
2083. Lichen, on topmost crags: with a sp. of geology too!
2084. Moss, from nr. top. 
2085. Ditto, from top crags. 
2086. Lichen, topmost crags. 
2087. Ditto     d——	d——
2088. Small portion of a splendid Fungus, found in forest nr. Te Hawera on the ground; resembling a large cauliflower; more than a foot across. 
2089. Frondose Jungermannia, bog, ground, nr. head of R. Ruamahanga. 
2090. Moss, on decaying logs, wood, nr. Te Hawera. 
2091. Lichen, on stones, cliff, side of road, nr. Wellington. 
2092. Frondose Jungermannia, sides of hill, Pahiatua. 
2093. Jungermannia	   d——	d——
2094. Moss, clayey ground, wood; nr. Te Hawera. 
2095. Moss, on rotten wood, in water course, nr. ditto. 
2096. Jungermannia, &c., upper branches of Tree, wood, nr. R. Manawatu. 
2097. Curious little fungus, on rotten log, shaded wood, nr. ditto. 
2098. Ditto  ditto, orbicular papillose	on ditto,	d——
2099. Ditto  ditto, clavate		on ditto,	d——
2100. Moss, banks of R. Manawatu. 
2101. Ditto	d——
2102. Ditto,	wood, nr. Te Hawera. 
2103. Ditto,	boggy ground, with 2089. 
2104. Lichen, &c., on fallen branches of Tree, wood, nr. Te Hawera. 
2105. Jungermannia, ground, Tararua mountain range. 
2106. Lichen, ground	d——
2107. Jungermannia, d——	d——
2108. Ditto,	   d——	d——
2109. Cenomyce elegantissima W.C., d—— d——
2110. Polytrichum, dry stony plains, Wairarapa
2111. Polytrichum, clayey banks, valley of the Hutt. 
2112. Scrap of a scarce Moss, on twigs, ground, ascent Tararua. 
2113. Lichen, ground, ascent Tararua. 
2114. Ditto,   ditto,		d——
2115. Small ditto, on trees, 	d—— 
2116. Jungermannia, ground,	d——
2117. Jungermannia,	d——
2118. Moss, fine, ground,	d——
2119. Jungermannia, 2 sps., on twigs, sides of watercourse, d——
2120. Lichen,		Tararua,
2121. Jungermannia, small, on trees, 	d——
2122. Lichen			d——
2123. Ditto, on ground,	d——
2124. Ditto, on twigs, on ground,	d——
2125. Jungermannia, fine, on trees,	d——
2126. Moss, on trees, 	d——
2127. Jungermannia? fine, on trees,	d——
2128. Moss, fine		d——	d——
2129. Frondose Jungermannia,	d——
2130. Scrap of an elegant little Jungermannia, d——
2131. Jungermannia, 	d——
2132. Several Jungermanniæ,	d——
2133. Lot of Sundries, from Tararua. 
2134. Frondose Jungermannia, banks R. Wangaehu, nr. Cape Turnagain. 
2135. Small Moss		d——		d——
2136. Jungermannia, 	d——		d——
2137. Jungermannia? (on bank, &c) d——	d——
2138. Marchantia,		d——		d——
2139. Small Moss, round, Ngapihao, E. Coast. 
2140. Small Jungermannia? d——	d——
2141. Moss, sides road to Wellington. 
2142. Jungermannia, ground, banks of Owahanga R., nr. Castle Point. 	
2143. Small Marchantia & Moss, clayey banks, watercourse, nr. Pahawa. 
2144. Moss, glen, nr. Oroi. 
2145. Small Moss, ground, nr. Pahawa. 
2146. Small Lichen, with 2144. 
2147. Ditto, from a dead branch of Corynocarpus, nr. R. Wangaehu. 
2148. Fungus,		d——
2149. Small Lichen		d——
2150. Small d——		d——
2151. Fungus		d——
2152. Small Jungermannia holes, dry rocks, sea shore, nr. Castle Point. 
2153. Ditto on living trees, Tautane, Cape Turnagain. 
2154. Ditto?       on living Edwardsia, d——	d——
2155. Small Marchantia, heights, Cape Kidnapper. 
2156. Moss,	d——		d——
2157. Targionia?	d——		d——
2158. Lichen,	d——		d——
2159. Scrap of a small plant, on ground, nr. Station: sent before. 
2160. Small Jungermannia, crags, Parangarahu, Cook’s Straits. 
2161. 	Ditto,	on roots of ferns	d——
2162. Moss, heights, heads, Port Nicholson. 
2163. Ditto	d——		d——
2164. Jungermannia? crags, Port Nicholson. 
2165. Jungermannia, on trees, head Wairarapa Valley. 
2166. Lichen,	d——		d——
2167. Moss, wet rocks, Turakirae. 
2168. Lichen, dry rocks, sea shore, Parangarahu. 
2169. Curious Fungus, on living Corynocarpus, Cape Kidnapper. 
2170. Large colored Lichen, crags, nr. Waiariki, Cook’s Straits. 
2171. Lichen, trees, head of Ruamahanga River. 
2172. Moss, upper branches of trees, forest nr. Te Hawera. 
2173. Fungus, on dead Tree, head of Ruamahanga R. 
2174.  ditto,  on rotten log, Pahiatua. 
2175.  ditto,  in cracks of prostrate log, ditto. 
2176.  ditto,  wet logs, wood, Ngaawapurua. 
2177.  ditto,  on living leaves of Metrosideros robusta, wood, nr. ditto. 
2178.  ditto, (Lycoperdon?) grassy spots, head of Manawatu River. 
2179.  ditto,  on Fagus twigs on ground,		d——
2180. Sundry Fungi, Jungermannia, &c., on a rotten branch, d——
2181. Fungus, ground, Te Hawera; bright crimson when fresh. 
2182. Aseroe,	d——	d—— (cannot preserve them)
2183. Lichen, woods, nr. Ruamahanga River. 
2184. Sundry Lichens,	d——
2185. Ripe fruit of “Perei” (sent before). 
2186. Fungus, on split (wood) Podocarpus spicata; Station. 
2187.  ditto,	d——		d——	d——
2188. Jungermannia; under water, stream, nr. the Lake, Rotoatara. 
2189. Fungus, large, edible, growing in clusters, trees, forests, nr. Cape Turnagain. 
2190. Lichen, road to Wellington. 
2191. Marchantia, wood, Turangakumu; nr. Tarawera. 
2192. Small Lichen, crags, sea shore, nr. Pahawa. 
2193. Alga? brook, nr. Patea. 
2194. Curious glaucous blue-colored Conferva, stream nr. Tarawera. 
2195. Conferva, R. Waiohingaanga, Hawke’s Bay. 
2196. Lichen, dry crags, Port Nicholson. 
2197. ditto, 
2198. ditto, from Kohinurakau. 
2199. Fungus, a young one, plains Station: vide,1296; same. 
2200. Alga? deep stream, head of Wairarapa Valley
2201. Lichen, trees, top of Ruahine ranges. 
2202. ditto, ground,		d——
2203. ditto, ground,		d——
2204. ditto, ground,		d——
2205. Alga, from tidal shingle banks, Ahuriri. 
2206. ditto, 	on shellfish, 	Ahuriri. 
2207. ditto,	beaches,		E. Coast. 
2208. ditto,	on tidal rocks	Tuingara, nr. Cape Turnagain
2209. Small Flustra?	beaches		E. Coast. 
2210. Coralline,		d——
2211. ditto,		d——
2212. Elegant plumose ditto, lovely red when fresh, becomes black and dingy in drying,  beaches, E Coast. 
2213. Lentularia? E Coast
2214. ditto,	d——
2215. Coralline? ( scrap) d——
2216. Alga, tidal rocks, Tuingara
2217. ditto, small, truly lovely, – only 1 small specimen!
2218. ditto, 	ditto,	beaches E. Coast
2219. d——	d——	d——
2220. d——		d——
2221. d——		d——
2222. d——		d——
2223. d——		d——
2224. d——		d——
2225. 2, or more ditto	d——
2226. 1 ditto		d——
2227. ditto, (scrap, but new to me) d——
2228. ditto		d——
2229. ditto ( scrap)		d——
2230. ditto (d——)		d——
2231. ditto		d——
2232. ditto		d——
2233. ditto (scrap)		d——
2234. ditto, tidal rocks nr. Manawarakau, growing in clusters. 
2235. Alga, scrap. 
2236. Alcyonium? under large stones nr Cape Turnagain. 
2237. Alga?
2238. ditto
2239. ditto, adhering to shells, &c., tidal banks nr. Cape Turnagain
2240. ditto
2241. 2 ditto
2242. 1 ditto
2243. ditto
2244. ditto, 	Cook’s Straits. 
2245. ditto 	d——
2246. d——	d——
2247. d——	d——
2248. d——
2249. d——, (truly elegant sp.)
2250. d——
2251. Small parasitical Alga. 
2253. 3, or more, small ditto. 
2254. Alga, red, hair-like. 
2255. ditto, from “Baridy Bay.”
2256. ditto, Cook’s Straits. 
2257. ditto, Port Nicholson; fine, lovely sp. 
2258. ditto, small, parasitical sp. 
2259. ditto, black, parasitical sp. 
2260. ditto, several. 
2261. ditto
2262. Several small ditto
2263. Minute, ditto
2264. d——	d——
2265. d——	d——
2266. Small Alga. 
2267. Small Alga. 
2268. Minute ditto, scraps
2269. d——	d——
2270. d——	d——
2271. ?Alga, from Hawke’s Bay. 
2272. ditto	d——
2273. d——	d——
2274. d——	d——
2275. d——	d——
2276. Zoophyte?	d——
2277. ditto?	d——
2278. ditto?	d——
2279. Lentularia?	d——
2280. Corralina?	d——
2281. ditto?	d——
2282. ditto?	d——
2283. Flustra?	d——
2284. ditto?	d——
2285. Alga?	d——
2286. Flustra?	d——
2287. Lentularia? beaches, E. Coast. 
2288. Sundries	d——
2289. Alga,	d——
2290. ditto	d—— (grows to a very large size)
2291. Spongia (2 kinds) Hawke’s Bay 
2292. d——		d——
2293. d——	Port Nicholson
2294. d——	E. Coast
2295. d——	d——
2296. d——	d——
2297. d——	d——
2298. d——	d——
2299. Alga, elegant, red, on shell-fish, Ahuriri, Hawke’s Bay. 
2300. Ditto				– Ditto – 
2301. ditto			    	ditto
2302. ditto	(tidal rocks & stones)  	d——
2303. Sundry scraps, Corallina?, &c. 		d——
2304. Grass, banks of Tauwarenikau River, Wairarapa. 
2305. (Scrap) Lomaria, from woods nr. Cape Turnagain; probably L. filiformis, A.C. – but I am in doubt: climbing trees. 
2306. Todea superba? (examine it) from woods, Ruahine. 
2307. Grass, from near Cape Turnagain. 
2308. Coprosma, growing in marshes in this neighbourhood, and which I hitherto supposed to be C. propinqua, – but now that I have obtained good specimens, I am inclined to consider it a new sp. – but compare with A.C.’s plant (which is very common at the North). Stout shrub, 10-12 feet high much branched, of rather erect growth, C. palustris. 
2309. A Cyperaceous? plant, from nr. Castle Point. This pretty and useful species is common in very sandy spots on the open beaches. The Natives call it Pingao, and use its leaves for many purposes: – for girdles, garments, and for ornamenting their houses, &c. – But, I know I sent it to you before, from nr. Cape M. v. Diemen. 
2310. Fossil wood, from Palliser Bay: from lower stratum of cliff, S. end of the Bay: cliffs, 160-200 feet high. 
2311. Ditto, from ditto: part of a tree 14 inches diamr., in same stratum with preceding. 
2312. Ditto, from ditto: part of a tree 20 inches diamr., lying in the stratum above the lowermost one. All 3 pieces I broke off from the same log. 
2313. Ditto, from lower stratum of sandstone cliffs, 120-160 feet high, on River Makaroro, base of Ruahine Mountain range, 60 miles from the sea. 
2314. Fossil wood, portion of a splendid specimen, from nr. Te Kopi, N. end of Palliser Bay; under the high cliffs. 
2315. Ditto, from under the high cliffs, near Cape Kidnapper. 
2316.  ditto		ditto
2317.  ditto		ditto
2318.  ditto		from Palliser Bay. 

The specimens in Spirit – 2 orchids, & fruit of Astelia macrocarpa, W.C., (1587). One of the Orchideous plants is, I think, Acianthus foliobractus, W.C., – the other is near to Cunningham’s rivularis; the perianth of this latter is a lovely lake (dark) color when fresh, and is very succulent. The little fish is one I got at Palliser Bay, and is quite new to me: I should like to know what it is. 

 # 


4 September 1850

		Waitangi, Hawke’s Bay,
	N. Zealand, Sept. 4/50. 

To Sir W. J. Hooker, &c. &c
Kew  nr. London. 

My dear Sir William,
I have barely time by this opportunity to Wellington for a single line. Notwithstanding I must not omit to thank you, for your very valuable and kind remembrance of me – which I will more particularly note in a few days when I hope to write you fully, having newly completed another one of plants, containing nearly 1000 lots (several no doubt, being duplicates, or more) principally Lichens and Algæ for you, not forgetting Dr. Harvey. 
I have, also, a N.Z. bat for Owen which will, I have no doubt, prove to be a n. sp. of Vespertilio, quite distinct (generically) from the one mentioned by Gray; &, better still, a couple of the very rare N.Z. rat – a true Mus, at least, so I take it. 
During my long residence in N.Z. and constant endeavour to obtain a sight of one of these rats, I have never till now succeeded. 
All these will leave by first vessel direct for England, and I hope will be quite in time for your son, of whose safe return to you I long to hear & to whom I beg you will present my very kindest regards. 
My object in now writing to you, so very briefly, and under cover to my agents (Messrs. Dixon & Co.,) is to request you kindly to instruct them as to which is the nearest and most generally useful work on Lichens. As I have desired them to send me (among some other Botanl. Works) – Fries’ Lichenog, or Acharius Synop. Lichen., or Acharius Lich. Univers. – but to refer the matter to you for your decision – or, there may be a newer and more useful work on Lichens, than any of the foregoing. 
Believe me, 
    My dear Sir William, 
        With every respect 
            Very sincerely yours
                 William Colenso. 

 # 

22 January 1851	
		
		Waitangi, Hawke’s Bay
		         New Zealand,
			                  January 22, 1851. 

Sir W. J. Hooker, K. H.,
&c. &c. &c. 
London. 

My Dear Sir William,
I have this morning despatched to the harbour 4 packages addressed to you; which I hope will arrive at Wellington in time for “the Lord. Wm. Bentinck” ship, about to sail in a few days for England. – They comprise, 3 cases and 1 Bale. The case No. 4, contains Algæ only, and is for Dr. Harvey. I have directed it to your care, in preference to sending it to his publisher, as it will not only be so much the easier for my agents, but also attended with much less risk and expense. 
The numbered lots now sent run from 2319 to 3938 – being upwards of 1600. About 1/3rd of which number is Algæ. Of Phænogamous plants there are only about 300; while half of the whole number is composed of the smaller cryptogams – Lichens, Mosses, Jungermanniæ and Fungi. 
No doubt a large proportion of the Cryptogams will prove on examination to be identical with some already sent. There are however some really new things in the lot, with which, I believe, you will be highly gratified. I cannot now particularize them; but I may just mention (among the Phænogamous plants), a pretty little white-flowered Liliaceous (?) plant, (reminding me, at first sight, of Tapeinia Magellanica,) which has pleased me much; another Pittosporum (or, perhaps, two); a Loranthus; a Gaultheria (or, two); a lovely Pterostylis, with colored perianth, twice the size of Banksii – a prize! an Edwardsia; a Coprosma (or, two); a Dracophyllum (or, two); a Fagus (or, two); a peculiar twining Umbelliferous plant, probably an Angelica; a Suttonia; – a Veronica; a Podocarpus (or, two); a Carmichælia (or, two); a Ranunculus (or, two) some Compositæ; and also, sundry grasses and Ferns. 
There is however, one plant in the lot, (No. 2496), concerning the discovery of which I must say a few words. It is a slender umbelliferous plant, of peculiar flagelliform and twining growth; in habit we have nothing like it in the whole Natural Order to which it belongs. I happened to be out visiting some of the Natives living on the banks of the river Tukituki 30 miles Inland from this Mission Station and being about to return, and peeping and peering about me, I saw a large basket of potatoes, which had been recently dug up and brought into the village, the covering of which seemed to be composed of some very curious long pliant and almost leafless plants. At first sight I took it for some of those peculiar Polygonums, which, I knew, grew on the sides of that river; but, on examining it, I was convinced it was new. After some little difficulty I prevailed upon the Native to take me to his plantation (about 2 miles off,) on the edge of which, he said, this plant grew. And there, at last, I found what I now send you specimens of. It was apparently only one plant which had formed a dense brake over a yard square of ground, climbing over some young trees to the height of 3-5 feet, and there twining about among the branches. It had a strong, though not unpleasant scent. I sought a long while in vain for flower and fruit and was just beginning to despair, when, at last, I found both – the former, however, scarcely expanded, small, and very scarce, the latter, old, and in profusion upon the branches which had twined among the young trees. I immediately recognised its fruit as clearly resembling that of our Angelica rosæfolia, in which opinion, I upon the slight examination I subsequently gave it, have been confirmed. It is, evidently, not an unknown plant to the Natives; and yet it is singular, that there should have been only one plant there, and that I should never have met with it, either before or since, elsewhere. – But this, by-the-bye, is quite a feature in N. Zealand Botany. – 
I have put up for Dr. Harvey duplicates of all the Marine Algæ now sent; and, also, of most of the freshwater ones. I have said, “all,” but there are a few numbers (about 10, or so) which I have not sent to him – from my having only one specimen of each of those numbers; these are also marked in the margin of the Memorandum herewith sent. All the specimens sent to Dr. Harvey, bear the same No. as the corresponding ones to you; and this arrangement will, I think, be convenient for all. I have sent you many more specimens of Algæ than I should have done had I not been sending to Dr. Harvey. I know several are repeated three or four times; – I hope I shall not have burdened you with them. 
A long (and wearisome) Memorandum, – which you will find in case, No. 1, will pretty minutely particularize the contents of the 4 packages. – 
In that case (No. l,) there is, also, a small parcel of plants for Mr. Ralfs (who is not, I presume, quite unknown to you) – who, though an entire stranger, very kindly sent me a large parcel of British Botanical specimens, and those for him are intended by way of return. I, also, enclose a List (open) of what I have sent him; which is intended for your perusal, that you may know, I have not yet sent him any specimens of what I believe to be particularly rare. He expressed a wish for some of the smaller crypts., and you will perceive that I have scarcely sent him any, and those, described ones. – There are, also, some other heterogeneous things in that case, which must speak for themselves. – 
Case, No. 3, contains specimens in bottles, in acid and spirit. Also, a bottle of oil from the Alectryon excelsum var serratum; – sundry fish, and other small marine animals and a small bottle containing specimens of all! the terrestrial mammals of N. Zealand (a Rat and a Bat) for Prof. Owen. 
The Bale, No. 2 contains, 3 mats of different vegetable fabrics, for your Museum (?). 
I commenced the culling and putting-up these specimens for you in June last year; and – what with continually adding, and my many interruptions – I only yesterday finished them!
I have, as you will find, ventured to name several of them. And this I have, in part, been induced to do, from the long delay which has taken place in the publishing of the N.Z. Flora, as well as from the knowledge I have of several private collectors now scattered. throughout N.Z., who, through their sending their collections from time to time to Europe will, I fear, forestall your son in his great and laudable work – at least you (he) will he able to say concerning a few of the specimens, – “We have a Mss. name from the first discoverer.” 
I hope that all will duly and safely arrive; and will, on the whole, prove not altogether unacceptable. 
I, last year, received (through my Agents, Dixon & Co.) a whole box of valuable books, for all which, I have, I believe, to thank you. But how to do so sufficiently and properly I know not. Among the lot, is a fine copy of Strickland’s work, on “the Dodo and its kindred”, which has written in it, the words, “From the Author”; but the hand-writing and the words are the same as those written in 2 other magnificent books – i.e. Your “Century of Orchidaceous Plants”, and “The Rhododendron of the Himalaya”. – Perhaps you, my dear Sir William, may understand this. I presume it may have been done by the publisher, as I see Reeve is the publisher of the 3 works, and the writing is the same in all. It would be, indeed, a sadly awkward affair, to receive such a valuable present “from the Author” of “the Dodo and its Kindred”, and not even to thank him for it. – 
Perhaps I may also mention the latest serials which have reached me: – “Kew Garden Miscellany”, No. 1-6 (this, I suppose, supersedes the Lond. Journ. Bot., of which I have had complete to the vii. vol. inclus.) – “De Candolle’s Prodr.” part ix; – Elements of Conchology (Reeve), part x – and “Flore des Jardins et des grandes Cultives”, par N. Saringe, tom. 1-3; – I almost dare to regret your having sent me this work, as I have quite forgotten all the little I once knew of the French language. – Unless a Botanical work, written in French should be exclusively on the Flora of N. Zealand, or the nearer Islands (such as Raoul’s which, however, I have never seen) I should not greatly care to possess it. I sincerely hope your “Sp. Filicum” is not stopped; the 4th is the last part which I have seen. 
Since I put up the plants for you, I have been looking into your “Ic. plant.”, vol. i, and have been struck with your Prionotes Americana, tab. xxx. – And, I think it quite likely that my great Gaultheria? (nos. 1018, 2362, &c.) which I now, for the first time, have detected splendidly flowering, may, after all, prove to belong to that genus. This is quite an after thought. 
I have been both gratified and amused with the remarks of M. Auguste Le Jolis in the 7th volume of your London Journal of Botany, p.533 etc. on a new kind of Phormium. His is a very plain and true statement as far as the description &c. of his Phormium goes; but, without doubt, it is the very identical plant which I first mentioned to you in my letter of July 20/41 (an extract from which you published in the Lond. Journ. Bot., vol. i. p.305) – and which I subsequently showed growing and flowering in my garden, to your son Dr. Jos. Hooker, in the spring of the same year, and which I had brought thither a small plant, from the E. Coast some considerable time previous. In my long Journal-like letter to you, dated Sept. 1/42, (and which you published in the Lond. Journ. Bot., vol. iii) I spoke of this “new species” as “Ph. Forsterianum” (vide, p.8); and, in a subsequent letter to you, dated Decr. 1/42, I again mention it. And in the more elaborate account of that Ramble (subsequently published in the Tasmanian Journal vol. ii, p.210) I again mention it by its then published name, “Ph. Forsterianum” adding (in a note) “I intend, at some future day, giving a descriptive account of this very elegant and useful, and very distinct species of Phormium.” True, I have not yet done this – but, inasmuch as its name has been long ago published in the two hemispheres, and that too, with no lack of living Botanical testimony to its identity, I think enough has been done to secure it its first published specific name. There is, however, a slight error; and that in your letter to M. Le Jolis (as printed in the Lond. Journ. Bot., vol. vii, p.535) in which you speak of a “small red-flowered kind”. Now, this species under consideration (Ph. Forsterianum, alias Colensoi, alias Cookianum) is not wholly “red”-flowered, but much as M. Le Jolis describes it, – reddish without and green within. And, it should not be forgotten, that the flowers of this plant darken considerably in drying, especially the lighter coloured parts of the perianth; and your having only imperfect and dried specimens to examine, while M. Le Jolis had living ones, sufficiently account for your calling it a “red-flowered species.” Further, the fact is, that both the Phormiums are highly sportive, in color of their perianths, in the size of every part, and in the shape and size of their pods, scarcely any two of the latter being alike. Some are sharp, others, obtuse-angled; some very acute at the apex, others quite as obtuse; some twisted, others plain, and that on the same plant. Again, if a pod is allowed to remain until it is fully ripe – to become dry – before it be gathered, it will generally be membranaceous; if, however, it is plucked before that period of dryness, it will be more or less thick and tough. And, further; the whole flower (especially its perianth and styles), changes its color considerably after impregnation, always becoming darker; so that, on a large full flowered scape, flowers may be found of various hues. 
There is, however, a large variety of the common (or, first-known) Phormium – for both species are equally common, which almost invariably bears red flowers. This is the largest kind in N. Zealand (If my memory is correct, Lady Franklin took away with her a scape of this variety, which measured 14 feet in length); and is, on account of its large size and little use, universally rejected by the Natives, who state its fibre to be less in quantity, as well as inferior in quality to that of the other kinds; while its bulky parenchyma, and superabundant gumminess, make its manipulation a heavy work. This variety is found on the edges of rich alluvial everwet swamps in deep rich soil on the margins of rivers, and, not infrequently, near native villages, and on the edges of woods; and, also, on dry, and barren sand-hills near the sea, as well as on certain sandy shores a little above high-water mark. I once thought that this variety might prove to be a distinct species – and it is, it must be confessed, in certain spots, a constant variety, – but I have seen it gradually losing its bulk, and length, and red flowers, and descending down (gradatim) to the common yellowish flowered state of that species; so that I have long ago set it down as being merely a variety. This kind is very common all about the Bay of Islands; and, in fact, to be everywhere met with throughout the whole of this N. Island. At present there are several varieties known to me, but only 2 species. One of those varieties is a very curious one, every leaf being highly and differently variegated in alternate stripes of white and green, running from the apex to the base of the leaf. This kind grew well in my garden at Paihia, Bay of Islands (as it does in my garden here), but, although I have seen several plants in different parts of the Island, I have never yet seen one in flower. Nor, have I seen a single plant growing quite wild; they being always found where they have been at some time or other planted by the Natives. 
The principal points of difference – points, I mean, which may be obvious to the most unscientific eye at first sight – between the two present known species, are – the reflexed subacute and mostly greenish perianth and the narrower and strictly tapering almost pungent leaf of the 2nd species; this latter character never fails; the smallest plant at all seasons may be correctly distinguished by it. Whereas the leaves of the 1st species (Ph. Tenax) are never strictly tapering, never acuminate; they (their apices) always present, so to speak, a segment of a circle, a kind of pointed arch. For, the carinated back of the leaf abruptly inclining towards its edges at about 2 inches from the apex, gives the top of the young unopened leaf seen in profile the appearance of the bow of a canoe. Hence it is that a mature leaf of Ph. tenax, unbroken, unslit at the apex, I have never yet seen; on the contrary full-grown leaves of the 2nd species, with unsevered apices may be obtained from every plant. 
I could offer further remarks upon this peculiarly N. Zealand genus; but, time presses. I will merely add that I have often attempted to secure good specimens of both species for you (which some years ago I promised to do) and have as often failed, what with the size of the plant, its stout woody scapes, perianths overflowing with honey and harsh and gummy leaves, which invariably roll up while drying, it is a most unpleasing subject to handle, and equally as ugly a specimen when dry. – But I will have another trial yet. – 
I thank you much for Tuckerman’s Enumeration of N. American Lichens; I value it highly. I would also thank you for publishing those few Algæ with their numbers (which I sent you in a former parcel) in your Lond. Jl. Bot., vol. vii. Those are pretty nearly all, of the numerous Crypts. which I have now sent during 10 years, that I have been enabled to arrange and lay out for my own self! Had those Jungermanneæ &c., which have also been published in that same work, had but their Nos. given with them, I should have enjoyed a still greater feast, for I have not time to say the least of it, for microscopical investigation. 
In writing to my London Agents about 4 months back I enclosed a hurriedly written note to you, requesting you to direct them in purchasing a good standard work on Lichens for me. I hope that note will have reached you, and that Book (with others ordered through them) will have left England long before this can possibly be received. 
I sincerely hope that your son will, long ere this, have returned to his paternal roof – safe and well. I greatly desire to hear of his being at work again – not in wandering about the world (notwithstanding his most interesting and spirited Journals, and beautiful drawings of Rhododendrons, &c., &c.) but in continuing his valuable Antarctic Botany. For, I long to see the Flora of N. Zealand, and Tasmania, published. Perhaps, however, there is much of selfishness in all this. I fully intended (and do still intend) to write him, but I cannot now do so, as the vessel is off, and I am sure I cannot restrain myself to a sheet of notepaper. Pray remember me most kindly, most affectionately to him – I trust however that he will discover far greater tokens of a real desire to serve him in much of what is now sent, than mere words can express. 
Believe me,
My dear Sir William,
Ever faithfully yours
     WILLIAM COLENSO

	
Memorandum of New Zealand Plants, put up for Sir W. J. Hooker, June 1850 – 

2319. Edwardsia, a truly graceful tree, 12-20 feet high; banks of River Oroua, W. base of Ruahine mountian range. Unfortunately, it had just past flowering, Decr. 1848. E. velutina, n. sp., W.C. 
[Sophora tetraptera var. microphylla]
2320. Podocarpus Cunninghamiana, fæm., from forests ascending Ruahine. (vide, No. 1631.)
2321. Sp. of a small young tree, without fl. or fr., believed to be a sp. of Thuja; Ruahine forests. nr. summit. T. stipulata, W.C. – (vide, No. 917.)
2322. Sp. of a fine composit. shrub (Brachyglottis?) 6-12 feet high, much branched, with a dense head of flowers. Sides of R. Oroua. 
[Olearia nitida]
2323. Leptospermum, small tree, 20-25 feet; ditto. 
2324. Grassy spots, margins of woods, head of Wairarapa valley; certainly several species of this plant. 
[Craspedia uniflora]
2325. Asplenium, from dry hills, wooded districts, interior. – Comp. with 1667, A. collinum, & 1859, A. scariosum. 
[A. flaccidum]
2326. Small Carex, hills, interior. 
[C. colensoi]
2327. Taraxacum top of Ruahine – see 1573. 
2328. Drapetes – ditto: – see, 1550. 
2329. Woolly petalled plant, ditto; scarce; see, 59. 
2330. Astelia, m. & f., ditto: – see, 1536. 
2331. Gaultheria, small shrub, top of Ruahine. 
2332. Carpodetus adpressa,? hilly forests, interior: see, 1716. 
2333. Carex, top of Ruahine, forming clumps in snow-runs. 
[Olearia cunninghamii]
2334. Small shrub, close woods near summit, male sps.; but see, 1521, & 1633. 
2335. Composit., a little plant with silvery leaf from summit, growing with Forstera, &c., but scarce; vide Nos. 919 & 1585
2336. At last! good specimens of No. 1578 – from top, ditto. 
2337. Composit., large shrub, 10-12 feet, woods, nr. top of Ruahine. 
2338. Solidago, wood, near head of Ruamahanga River; 5-8 feet high. Either 2 species, or a very sportive plant; – α petals long & narrow; β petals short & broad. See, also, its leaves, some parasite thereon. 
2339. A fine sp. of Pterostylis – from dense tangled & untrodden forests, banks of River Rangitikei. The finding of this cheered me not a little in the midst of much hardship, in Decr. /48. Pt. colorata, W.C. 
2340. Hymenophyllum pulcherimum; with preceding. 
2341. Oreomyrrhis – a large sp.; comp. with 1601. Ruahine. 
2342. Small grass, summits, ditto. 
2343. Earina rupestris,? (See, No. 1607), – ditto. 
2344. Composit., large shrub, 12-14 feet, wooded districts, interior. 
2345. Acianthus, from shady glens, E. Coast, near Oroi. Comp. with A. foliobractus, No. 1135. 
2346. Acianthus rivularis?? wet thickets, E. Coast, betn. Castle Point & Cape Palliser. 
2347. Acianthus? with preceding. 
[Corysanthes triloba]
2348. Pterostylis intermedia, n. sp., W.C., from same locality. 
[P. banksii]
2349. Pterostylis ——, with large oval cauline leaves, from same locality. Vide Nos. 1906, & 1959. 
2350. Thelymitra, from E. Coast. 
2351. Microtis, various species? – ditto. 
2352. Coprosma, ?n. sp., small rigid shrub; clefts in rocks, nr. Pahawa, W. of Castle Point, 2-3 feet high. – C. compacta, n. sp., W.C. 
2353. Scrap of a tree fern, wooded districts, interior. – Sent before?
[Hemitelia smithii]
2354. Ranunculus from top of Ruahine. Comp. with 1466, R. longiscapus; – regret exceedgy. my sps. being devoured!
2355. Myosotis, small species, & probably near M. spathulosa; thickets, interior. M. hispidus, W.C. 
2356. Suttonia montana, see, 1514 – these from same tree; only a few poor specimens at two subsequent & toilsome journies hither. 
2357. Podocarpus, a prostrate plant, high plains, base of Tongariro, Taupo, mās. & fæm. Vide No. 960. P. repens, W.C. 
2358. Epacrid. – from same locality, scarce: vide, No. 964. Flowers not expanding, but believed to be an Epacris; – E. Taupoense, n. sp., W.C. 
2359. Epacridacea – from ditto: vide, No. 948; in fruit; α red-fruited sp. or var., β white-fr’d——. 
2360. Curious little reedy plant from deep bog – base of Tongariro, vide No. 983. – this in good state. 
2361. Pittosporum viridum. (vide, No. 1008;) these from same trees but in good state of flowering; I sent a Native for them. 
[P. fasciculatum]
2362. At last! in fine flower. This scarce Gaultheria, from same locality as No. 1018. – G. macrophylla, W.C. – and only one, or two plants there. (note added: it may prove to be a Prionotes)
2363. Galium, from boggy spot, near R. Wangaehu, base of Tongariro. Vide G. Tararuense, No. 1951. 
2364. Cyperaceæ – (chætospora?) – growing with 2360. 
[Schœnus tendo]
2365. Desvauxiaceæ?: – small plant – ditto. 
2366. Harsh Grass, sides of R. Wangaehu. 
[Danthonia semiannularis var. alpina]
2367. Pittosporum; another handsome species, a fine full branched shrub, or small tree, 12-18 feet high; sides of rivers & edges of forests, base of Tongariro, P. uniflorum, W.C. 
[P. colensoi]
2368. Gaultheria, shrub, 4-5 feet high, nr. Motukino village, 10 miles E. of Taupo Lake; but scarce. Comp. with Nos. 216, 217, Journal lot. G. intermedia,? W.C. 
2369. Pimelea, compact, handsome shrub, 3-5 feet high; dry high plains, base of Tongariro. Vide Nos. 967, 979. – P. buxifolia. n. sp., W.C. 
[P. buxifolia]
2370. Pimelea, shrub, 2-3 feet, looser growth than preceding – same locality. P. carinata, W.C. 
[P. buxifolia]
2371. Pimelea, – low, bushy plant; plains, Taupo. 
2372. Loranthus? – small sp., flowers unexpanded; ditto. 
2373. Grass, dry volcanic plains nr. Motukino. 
[Poa cæspitosa]
2374. Epacrid., a small bushy procumbent plant, gravelly spots, sides of R. Wangaehu, Taupo. Leaf narrower & plant much smaller than No. 2359. –
[Cyathodes colensoi]
2375. Coriaria, small, 1 foot or so high – growing with 2369. – C. lanceolata, W.C. 
[C. thymifolia]
2376. Gaultheria, – plains, nr. Rotoaira Lake, Taupo. – Shrub, 1-2 feet; a beautiful sp. – Vide, 1535. – G. rotundifolia, W.C. 
[G. rupestris]
2377. Thelymitra, – Taupo plains. 
2378. Grass, dry plains, Taupo. 
2379. Gaultheria, small, rambling, low shrub; plains, Taupo. – Vide, 985. G. ?neglecta, W.C. 
2380. Carmichælia nana, (vide, 1156,) – in flower!
2381. Leucopogon, small graceful tree, 12-14 feet, forests, ascent, Ruahine. L. viridiflorum, W.C. 
[L. viridiflorum]
2382. Composit. – shrub, 4-6 feet high, sides of streams, base of Tongariro. –
2383. A little gem! and plentiful too. – A little Liliaceous plant, dry plains between Taupo & Runanga; reminding me, at first sight, of your Tapeinia Magellica. It grows rather cæspitosely among Mosses, small Celmisias, &c.; its flowers, save when expanded, being almost entirely hid. 
[Herpilirion novæ-zealandiæ]
2384. Good specimens of that curious little plant, No. 1545, growing with preceding. 
2385. Dracophyllum, – comp. D. vaginatum, No. 1775, – Shrub, 5-8 ft. 
[D. urvilleanum var. filifolium]
  2385α  a small white Lichen on ditto. 
2386. Small graceful shrub, forest ascending Ruahines, 4-6 feet. Gathered in passing, supposing it to be identical with 2334 – which, however, it is not. 
[Aristotelia fruticosa]
2387. Suttonia repens. from Summit, in flower. Vide, No. 1569. 
2388. Carina, woods, Ruahines: comp with 2643. 
2389. Loranthus, from woods, sides of River Makororo. L. solitariflorus, n. sp., W.C. 
2390. Polytrichum? – large, in fruit, Ruahine. 
2391. Small, dry Grass – Taupo Plains. 
2392. Ranunculus, – dry plains, banks of Riv. Mohaka. – Comp. with 1754. R. Mohakense, W.C. 
2393. Large Grass, woods, nr. Tarawera. –
2394. Cyperaceæ: boggy ground, near mouth of Riv. Waikato, – i.e. its entrance into Taupo Lake. 
[Cladium glomeratum]
2395. Ditto:	ditto. 
[Carex echinata]
2396. Thelymitra, from near ditto: perhaps 2 sp. 
[T. longifolia]
2397. Scrap of a Pratia? – all I have – found, at night, among 2395. 
2398. Lomaria gracilis, n. sp., W.C. – Glen near Motukino; If this should prove only a var. of L. alpina, then assuredly L. alpina is distinct from L. linearis. 
2399. Cheilanthes? – only 1 found with very young fruit, growing with preceding: Comp. with Nos. 901, & 1065. 
2400. Hymenophyllum, sides of Riv. Makororo. Comp. with No. 1608, H. montanum. H. circinatum, n. sp., W.C. 
  2400α White Lichen, on same. 
  2400β Jungermannia, with ditto. 
2401. Gaultheria, from top of Titiokura, – the high ridge W. of Hawke’s Bay & bounding same; small plant, 6 inches high. G. lanceolata, W.C. 
2402. Celmisia, – growing with 2383. C. cineraria, W.C. 
2403. Composit., shrub, 3-4 feet, golden leaves, – Taupo plain. 
[Cassinia vauvilliersii]
2404. Microtis, large stout sp., Taupo plain. 
[Prasophyllum colensoi]
2405. Composit. (Senecia?) – I send half of my only specimen. – Taupo plains; not uncommon. 
2406. Dracophyllum, shrub 4-6 feet, dry plains, with 2385. D. multiflorum, n. sp., W.C. 
[D. subulatum]
2407. Dracophyllum, shrub, 5-8 feet, growing with foregoing, a few-flowd. sp., branches very long, filiform & drooping. D. cernuum, W.C. 
[D. subulatum]
2408. A shrub, or small tree, of erect growth, 7-9 feet high, banks of rivers, base of Tongariro, scarce. It has the habit of Suttonia – & is quite new to me. 
2409. Microtis? a robust sp., plains, base of Tongariro. – Comp. with 2404. 
[Prasophyllum colensoi]
2410. Gaultheria – a scrap only, from ditto: – but compare with 2376. G. ?racemosa, W.C. 
[This number occurs on the ticket with the preceding number. There is no specimen in WELT]
2411. Little Composit. – and but a scrap; from ditto. 
2412. Pentachondra – from ditto. 
2413. Astelia – a scrap – from Ruahine. A. lanigera, W.C. 
2414. Viscum – woods, Ruahine. V. venosum, W.C. 
2415. Coniferæ: “Pahautea.” (nom. in vulg. dict.) – from the same tree as No. 1511 – at Mokaipatea. The sps. have also male amentæ. I have only seen this one tree, unless 911 shod. prove to be the same sp. – Thuja ?pahautea W.C. 
2416. Jungermannia; large species, on Fagus, top of Tararua range. 
2417. Jungermannia; small sp., with ditto. 
2418. Weinmannia tree, 30 feet, & upwards, forests, Tararua. 
2419. Gleichenia intermedia; Tararua: Vide, No. 1765. 
2420. Fagus, tree, 20-25 ft., Tararua. F. coriacea, n. sp., W.C. – Near to F. Menziesii; but nucales not hairy as shewn in your plate of that sp. I brought plenty of fruit, which unfortunately got devoured by some plaguy maggots!
[F. menziesii]
2421. Orchideous epiphyte, from Tararua: comp. with 1763. 
  2421α Black Fungus on leaves of ditto. 
2422. Astelia, from woods, ascent to Tararua; an elegant species; A. rubra, W.C. 
2423. Elæodendron micranticum? – Small tree, 10-12 feet, Tararua. Fruit larger than that of E. micranthum. 
2424. Olea, – tree, 20-25 feet, woods, Tararua. Comp. with 2032. I think, however, it is new: O. Tararuense, W.C. 
2425. Fagus, from forests, Ruahine range)
2426. d——		d——	       )  brought for 
2427. d——		d——	       )  Examn.
2428. d——		d——	       )
[2425-8 F. solandri]
2429. Black Fungus, on leaves of Leptospermum, banks of Riv. Pahawa. 
2430. Green Cheilanthes? on Notholæna? from Te Apiti, banks of same River. Perhaps sent before; see 1988. 
2431. Potamogeton; – stream nr. Cape Turnagain. 
2432. Veronica – a very lovely species, 3-5 feet, with profusion of flowers; nr. Cape Turnagain. – V. Turnagainense, n. sp.? W.C. 
2433. Oxalis, small sp., from nr. same Cape. 
2434. Cercodia, hills between E. Coast & Wairarapa. 
2435. Curious Lichen? on leaves, Friesia, Wairarapa. 
2436. Friesia ovata? a fruiting specimen. (vide Nos. 290, 1699 & 1786): – another peculiarity of this sp. is its leaves being “squared off”, as it were, to the last pair of nerves; from Huaangarua, Wairarapa. 
2437. Pratia ?rotundifolia, n. sp., W.C. From same locality; unfortunately neither fl. nor fr. Comp., however, with No. 3, “Journal” lot. 
2438. Small Grass, wet banks Pahawa River. 
2439. Small, erect Euphrasia, downs, Wairarapa. 
[E. cuneata]
2440. Aralia crassifolia, head of Wairarapa Valley. 
2441. Composit. (Haxtonia?) – good specimens of a shrub (sent before, No. 2013,) from banks of Pahawa R. 
2442. Scrap of a Coprosma, from head of Wairarapa Valley, – doubtless, sent before, vide, Nos. 1053 & 1828; and, also, Northern (Ẁangarei) specimens. 
2443. Alga? – from a stream, nr. Te Kaikokirikiri village, head of Wairarapa valley. 
2444. Moss, from ditto. 
2445. Podocarpus Totara? forest, nr. Te Hawera village. 
2446. Euphrasia, scrubby plant, 2-2½ feet, diffuse; in wet spots, Wairarapa valley; leaves small. – E. multiflora, n. sp., W.C. Comp. with No. 179; and with 1984, E. foliosa, from Cook’s Straits. 
[E. cuneata]
2447. Composit. – the plant I have not seen, these few specimens having been brought me by a Native, from road betn. Ahuriri & Te Wairoa, H. Bay. They are similar to a Northern plant, but larger. 
2448. Trichomanes pendulum, W.C., (vide, No. 1884,) on living trees, forests, near Te Hawera. 
[T. venosum]
2449. Todea, – var. of T. pellucida – T. fruiticosa, W.C. – from forests near Te Hawera. A larger plant than T. pellucida: segments bi-, tri-, and quadrifid; sori meeting over the segmental nerve, &c. – But ex. & compare. 
2450. Olea – a large tree, forest nr. Te Hawera – comp. with Nos. 1798, & 2035. 
  2450α. Scrap of Jungermannia, on same. 
2451. Aspidium, – plucked casually in passing – same forest. – I believe it to be a n. sp., though near to A. hispidulum; I send you all I brought away. A. obscurum? W.C. See, No. 293, “Journal” lot, & No. 761. 
2452. Fruit of Plagianthus multiflora, W.C., from Te Hawera; (whence, flowg. sps., No. 1830). 
2453. Alga, fresh w., from a stream, forest, nr. ditto. 
2454. Tmesipteris, – which I think is new: differing from T. Forsteri, whence it (as Brown says, Prodr. p.20) “foliis apice non truncatis”; – and from T. truncatis, (vide your drawing, Gen. Fil.,) in the apiculated apex being oblique, & formed of the limb & not of the costa, &c. – Tm. latifolius, W.C. Doubtless I have sent it before. 
2455. Scrap of a Cyathea – brought for examn.; same wood. C. dealbata, var. caudata, W.C. 
2456. Adiantum – which I believe is new; – from woods, Tararua. A sp. nr. to the Pahawa species, (No. 2002) which, however, is much smaller, &c. – it is, also, near to the Northern, (Bay of Islands & Manukau) species, which have, however, more sinuses (5) in each lobe, – the lower lobes trapezoid, &c. – but compare. A. sinuatum, W.C. 
2457. Oxalis, shingle banks nr. sea, H. Bay: – vide , 1081. 
2458. Petroselinum – from Mission Station, H. Bay. Comp. with No. 426. P. latifolium, W.C. 
2459. Grass (from garden) – brought from banks of R. Ruamahanga. 
2460. Chenopodium, muddy flats, close to Missn. Station – a large diffuse plant. Certainly sent before?
2461. Goodenia – station; sent before. 
2462. Hibiscus – This plant I originally collected on the W. Coast, in 1837, betn. Hokianga & Cape Maria V. D., subsequently on the E. Coast, betn. Wangaroa & the Bay of Islands – I showed it to A. Cunningham, who pronounced it to be H. vesicarius; and such I believed it to be – sending you a specimen. But, last Summer, in comparing the living plant with De Candolle’s descriptn. of H. vesicarius, I found a great difference – principally in the seeds, which are not “Glabrous”, nor are its leaves ever “indivisa”. – with pleasure therefore, I dedicate it to the unfortunate R. Cunningham, who first discovered it.        H. Cunninghamii, n. sp., W.C. 
2463. Calceolaria – prostrate plant, from river sides, Aropauanui, H. Bay. This, I always supposed to be C. Sinclairii – but I find a difference, the under lip not being trilobed as in that, – I think I have sent it you. C. rivularis, W.C. 
2464. Lagenophora, from Mission Station. – See No. 1055. 
2465. Small Pimelea, – Station. –
2466. Veronica, – one of my garden shrubs, 6-7 feet. –
2467.  ditto, – ditto, shrub, 2-3 feet. Brought from Parimahu, a headland half way betn. Cape Kidnapper & Cape Turnagain, See No. 101. 
2468. Calystegia tuguriorum, Forst. I send you this, that I may the better call your attention to the fact, that the roots of this species were formerly eaten commonly by the Natives, and are now eagerly sought after by pigs. – Now C. sepium is a terrible purgative. See what Don (vol. iv. p.296,) says; Brown, seems to allow of a difference between Calystegia sepium & Forster’s. 
2469. Cruciferæ, – yellow flowd. plant. See, Nos. 403, 430; but, as I believe there are 2 sps. (at least), one, glabrous leaved, & one pilose – I send you this. Station. 
2470. Myriogyne, prostrate; Station. 
2471. Asplenium – my only specimen! certainly not lucidum, (which I, when I gathd. it, suppd. it to be,) nor can I reconcile it with any sp. I know. It may be A. polyodon, Forst., but this I have never seen. Comp. it with No. 660 – a pannicle, from a plant, gathered in a wood on banks, R. Thames – certainly a beautiful sp. A. subcaudatum, W.C. 
2472. Mazus – from the old spot, wood, nr. R. Manawatu. – (vide, No. 304.) From these, however, you will learn its manner of growth, by suckers (succulus). – There is a dense bed of them in that low wood, but it is rare to find one in flower. 
2473. Drimys, in fruit, very distinct from Northn. sp. – Sent before. D. melalepos, W.C. 
2474. Lycopodium, found, fallen from trees, forest, banks of R. Manawatu: of excessively cæspitose growth. 
2475. Hydrocotyle? creeping plant, head of Manawatu R. 
2476. Gnaphalium, n. sp., near to involucratum. From sides of River Mangatainoka. A. foliobracteolatum, W.C. 
2477. Alseuosmia, in fruit; the only S. species. Sent already. 
2478. Fagus – a small sp. which I brought for examination; a large tree, 60 feet & more; head of Manawatu. A species near F. fusca, but, I think distinct; – cobwebbed in axils of last pair of nerves only. – See, 1564, F. punctata; & 1547, F. adpressa?; & 1867. F. robusta? W.C. 
[F. fusca.]   [See also note on 2483]
2479. Orchid. Epiphyte, – hills, forests, with preceding. – Sent before – but these are good sps., &, I think, quite distinct from No. 2421. 
2480. Podocarpus – perhaps a n. sp., though near to P. spicata. Leaves less crowded & not distichous & almost pointletted (obtusus cum acumine); fruit subpaniculate; falls off in drying: from fallen branches in forest, nr. head of Manawatu R. P. parvifolius, W.C. 
[P. spicatus]
2481. Fruit of an Urtica, (vide, Nos. 297, 1823,) from same plant as those specimens. Fortunately this terrible plant is rather scarce. During a journey in the autumn of 1849 I proved its virulence; in leaping over a ditch, in a wood, I unwittingly jumped among some small plants of it, & got severely stung – large blotches immediately swelled up, & the pain was great, heightened tenfold at night, or when I should wash my hands – it lasted nearly 4 days, going & coming at fits & starts. – I had pulled out the stings of the plant immediately. –
2482. Weinmannia? forests, head of Manawatu R. Comp. with No. 2418. –
[W. racemosa]
2483. Veronica, – a small, slender tree, 14-16 feet, et alt. – from banks of the River Mangatawainui, (near the head of the R. Manawatu). Believing this may prove new, I have named it excelsa. [By-the-bye, the name of this stream (Anglice – “the stream of the great beeches”) reminds me of the particular habitat of No. 2478 – Fagus robusta.] V. excelsa, n. sp., W.C. 
[V. salicifolia]
2484. Coriaria, from ditto: – 20 feet high, trunk 9 in. diamr. Some 10 or 12 year ago, I believe I saw the same species on the margins of woods to the North of Wangaroa, (lat. 35o.) – I send you my only scrap, which I brought away for comparison with sarmentosa, from which it certainly differs as you will find. – C. gigantea, n. sp., W.C. 
2485. Elæocarpus – which is certainly distinct from E. Hinau; its leaves being obovate-lanceolate, much less serrated & only occasionally foveolate, its fruit is much more globular, pedicels longer, &c., – Comp. it with 1969: – E. coriaceus, W.C. Woods, nr. Manawatu; – gathered from fallen branches. 
2486. Asplenium: – which I brought away thinking it to be falcatum. – of that sp. Br. says – “frondibus pinnatis rachibusque glabris” – this is densely woolly, and is (if I recollect aright) of a very different color, &c – A. discolor, W.C. Forests, nr. Te Hawera village. 
2487. Asplenium: – a sp. very near foregoing, &, also, near Forsterianum, (mihi) – diffg. however, from the latter, in its much smaller size, in not being so deeply incised, in its Involucres not dehiscing over against each other in pairs, in its lowermost pinnæ being opposite; & arising from one place on the anterior part of Rachis. They (the 4 species)  seem to run thus 
	1. A. falcatum, small, glaber,
2. A. discolor,
3. A. distans, (i.e. the present sp.)
4. A. Forsterianum. – 
But judge for yourself. You may very possibly unite these 2 sp. –
A. distans W.C. From same forests with preceding. 
2488. Lomaria Colensoi, – here see specimens of that fern in different stages, & aspects of growth. It does not, however, grow so large here, as in the dense & high forests of the interior. 
  2488α. A curious Fungus on the lower side of its frond – at first sight reminding me forcibly of your illustration of Nipholobus Penangiana. This Fungus is rather common on this fern
2489. Lomaria discolor? – Of this fine fern I am in doubt. I have no descripn. of that sp; & I think there are certain points of diff. between this & the Northern sp. (L. discolor)
2490. Aspidium ? (Polypodium, W.C.) pennigerum? a large variety (?) on lower pinnules the nearest lobes to the rachis are subpinnatifid produced. I have long been in doubt concerning this. See, No. 1131. Common in low spots, forests. 
2491. Cænopteris (Asplenium? auct.,) flaccida, – forests. Indusium & sori linear. 
2492.  ditto (?) var. cymbiformes, W.C. – Indusm. & sori elliptico-oblong: forests. –
[Asplenium flaccidum]
2493. Lomaria rotundifolia, mihi. Common in damp woods. 
2494. Notholæna or Cheilanthes, fine plant, downs, sides of River Tukituki, H. Bay. Comp. 1462. 
2495. Lomaria – certainly very distinct from L. procera? – Fructification almost that of a Polybotrya. – L. auriculata, W.C. Forests, interior. 
2496. I must find time to tell you all I know about this (to me) interesting plant, – or, rather, how I came to know about it. – I am sure it will please you much; because you have had nothing like it in all the nat. order to wh. it belongs. – Moreover, I believe it may be classed with your Angelica rosæfolia, or, rather, with a similar species, or var. of that sp., which grows here. Angelica ?flagelliformis, W.C. 
2497. Podocarpus dacrydioides; forests; Common. 
2498. Nipholobus – Excepy. long fronds; ditto; rather do. 
2499. Myosotis – a small species from Limestone crags, near the junction of the Riv. Tukituki. –
2500. A Moss – woods: probably sent before. 
2501. Jungermannia, on Melicope simplex; woods. 
2502. Botrychium – a large var. – plains, nr. head of R. Manawatu. 
2503. Large Pelargonium (for the 3rd time! vide, Nos. 275, 435,) – Hawkes Bay & elsewhere. 
2504. Hydrocotyle – a large sp., sides of lagoon, Tangoio, H. Bay. 
[H. novæ-zealandiæ]
2505. Chrysobactron Hookerianum, in fruit & fl. from my garden: vide, No. 1850. 
2506. Larger specimens of a small pruinose-leaved shrubby plant, from shingle banks, near Sea, H. Bay. 
[Rhagodia nutans]
2507. Lepidium – good specimens: of this plant I had hitherto sent you only scraps, vide, No. 419, &c. I again send it, believing it to be distinct from oleraceum, the siliculæ of wh. sp. is said to be “ovatis acutiusculis,” while that of this is sub-orbicular or sub-cordate. L. neglectum, W.C. Shores, H. Bay. 
2508. Euphorbia glauca? – the leaves, &c., of this plant differ from the descript. of E. glauca. From shores, near the harbour of Ahuriri, H. Bay. See, also, No. 183, from nr. Cape Turnagain: – E. apiculata, W.C. 
2509. Suttonia, n. sp., – graceful shrub, 6-7 feet, sides of rivers, Tangoio, H. Bay. Fruit remarkably large. 
S. lanceolata, W.C. I will send you better sp. by-and-bye. 
[Myrsine urvillei]
2510. Suttonia (doubtless, sent before, see No.     ) from forests, head of Manawatu Riv., shrub, or small tree, 12-14 feet, leaves emarginate. Possibly near to Dr. Jos. Hooker’s n. sp., S. tenuifolia. –  S. undulata, W.C. 
[Myrsine urvillei]
2511. Leptospermum – a small shrub, 2-3 feet high; open downs, Ahuriri, H. Bay. 
2512. Dodonæa – (again! see, No. 1459.) certainly distinct from D. spathulata; – a low shrub, 3-5 feet high, of diffuse growth, on dry shingle banks, H. Bay. D. pellucida W.C. Foliis non “viridis.” I should not be surprised if several species of N.Z. Dodon. were found included under the one sp. D. spathulata. 
2513. Little Libertia, past flg., forest, nr. head of Ruamahanga River, – see, No. 1860; – of which, however, I have no Duplicate. –
2514. Lomaria – a climbing species from the low woods near Te Hawera village. A sp. which I regularly gather every year, and hunt over diligently for fruitful fronds but in vain. It is, however, certainly distinct from filiformis – but compare them; comp., also, with No. 700, which, however, (I quote from memory) must be distinct. – L. spinulosa, W.C. – first gathered in 1845. 
2515. scrap of a yg. tree from Alpine forests. Perhaps a yg. plant of No. 45 – my alpine Pittosporum? – See, also, a scrap of a Jungermannia on it. 
2516. Euphrasia revoluta, (?) – see, 1593,
2517. Plantago Ruahinensis (?) – see 1577,
 & 1540			 )    from
2518. Lycopodium			 )    top of
2519. Pentachondra, see, No. 952	 )    Ruahine
	By the way, some of the Taupo Pentachondra have 6 pyrenæ in each fruit. I have sent you specimens thence; I now again send you fruit. 
2520. Lomaria – distinct from alpina? of which Brown says, “rachi glabra, stipule nudiuscula,” which your plate (Fl. Antarct.) shews. – L. breviscapa, W.C. From top of Ruahines. 
2521. Scrap of a small Carex. 
2522. Ditto Mniarum. 
2523. Ditto Lycopodium, bis, see No. 1832) – I have no dscriptn. of L. volubile; the branches in this sp. are hardly “compressed.” –
2524. Isolepes? –
2525. Small curious plant, low spots, shores of H. Bay, nr. Cape Kidnapper. 
[Myosurus aristatus]
2526. Least Myosotis; vide, No. 1477; same locality. 
2527. Coprosma, – perhaps a n. sp., evidently having affinity with vaginans, (1810,) palustris, (2608,); C. propinqua – a low sub-prostrate rambling shrubby plant. C. repens, – unfortunately, not in fl. Shingle banks near the sea, H. Bay. C. depressa W.C. 
2528. Juncus antarcticus? from summit of Ruahine: vide, 1729. 
2529. Small, grass-like plant, with ditto: vide, 1582: – also, 2622. 
[Centrolepis pallida] 
  2529α. Very minute Moss or Jungerm, with ditto. 
2530. Another little Myosotis, nr. M. calycina, 1931, & M. divergens 1719: (possibly a var. of M. calycina;) – M. filiformis, W.C. 
2531. Jungermannia, – a large sp. in fruit nr. J. gigantea, but stalk-leaves are much larger, &c. – (perhaps, already sent). 
2532. Hypnum spinervium? – high damp forests, banks of R. Oroua; – 1 sp. of male fl. 
2533. Hymenophyllum multifidum? – more fruitful than is commonly found – same woods. –
2534. Fine Moss, though rarely in fruit – I send my only fruiting sp. 
2535. ditto, an elegant glaucous sp., – rare; same woods; on logs. 
2536. ditto, a truly elegant glabrous sp., from ground, forest, Titiokura heights, bounding N.W. horizon from Ahuriri, Hawke’s Bay. This is, to me, quite new; I regret I have only 1 sp. with very young fruit. If I knew its Gen. &c., I would certainly dedicate it to you. – I shall look out for more. 
2537. A curious black Antennaria?-like brachiate plant, growing on trees in dark woods – (nearly destroyed in my pocket). 
2538. Thelymitra – a scrap, from my pocket-book.
2539. Sp. of the minute yellow-flowered Monocotyledon, No. 378, – from hilly localities interior. 
2540. Moss, from forest between Te Hawera & Ruamahanga R. 
2541. Jungermannia, scrap,		d——)  all on a
2542. ditto,			d——)  rotten log
2543. ditto			d——)
2544. Elæocarpus laciniatus – flowers only. Collected in the dense forest nr. Te Hawera, where they profusely covered the ground. A species distinct from E. Hinau, having its petals laciniated, &c., & calyces glabrous. It may belong to Nos. 2485, 1969, which see. I was behind my Natives, & travelling against time, or I would have secured more satisfactory specimens. – The trees, whence the flowers had fallen, were robust & high – 60 feet et alt. – E. laciniatus, n. sp., (?) W.C. 
2545. Scrap of a Geranium, shores of H. Bay: probably sent before. 
2546. Conferva? sides of a rocky waterfall, nr. Oroi. E. Coast. 
2547. A curious little Alga, on stones, water’s edge, R. Kowhaiä, dense forest R. Manawatu. 
2548. Highly curious Lichen? & very rare, from Ruahine, on trees. 
2549. Conferva,? stream, forest, nr. Manawatu. 
2550. Jungermannia? – a sp. near J. flabellata, sides of rivers, forest nr. Manawatu; – probably sent before: – J. longicaulis, W.C. 
2551. Alga? cliffs, R. Oroua. 
2552. Moss, d––––––, d–––––– 
2553. Moss, d––––––, d–––––– 
2554. Curious Fungus, ground, banks of R. Kawatau, interior. 
2555. Moss, rotten log, forest, interior. 
2556. Verrucaria, on bark, log, nr. Te Hawera, V. densa, W.C. 
2557. Small Jungermannia, on ditto. 
2558. Elegant Moss, of dense growth; stone, top of Ruahine. 
2559. Minute Jungermannia, with ditto. 
2560. Moss, wet logs, forest, Otara; banks of R. Rangitikei, – (comp. with No. 2535.)
2561. Moss – Hookeria, – a sp. near pennata, but stipules are very different, & leaves distant & decurrent; on wet logs, Otara forest. H. distans. W.C. 
2562. A hair-like something (observed among mosses in those dense forests) – if you can make anything of it – well. 
2563. Elegant little scarce moss – same forests. 
2564. Scrap of a Lichen, ground, banks of R. Pahawa. Broken to bits. 
2565. Mniarum – leaves & peduncles much longer than M. biflorum, leaves mucronate scarious; – same locality as foregoing. – M. mucronatum, W.C. 
[Scleranthus biflorus]
2566. A Lichen – Lecidea? – new to me, from limestone crags, at Ngawakatatara, H. Bay; L ?muraria, W.C. 
2567. A ditto – scrap – from same crags. 
2568. Antennaria-like – from living Laurus tawa, wood, ditto. 
2569. Lichen, on an old Cordyline, Te Hawera. 
2570. Ditto,		d–––––– 
2571. Ditto,		d–––––– 
2572. Ditto, Lecidea? crags, nr. highwater mark, S. of Castle-point. 
2573. Fern from d–––– Aralia Schefflera –
2574. This little scented Cryptogam (the darling “Kopunu” of the N.Z. belles & beaus.), which I have already sent you as a Jungermannia – I now find to be a Moss – These fruiting specimens I got accidentally from some natives, at a small fishing village, nr. Castle-point. 
2575. Small Lichen, crags, nr. Waraurangi, E. Coast. 
2576. Ditto (2 kinds)	d–––––– 
2577. Small Moss		d––––––
2578. Lichen, &c		d–––––– 
2579. Lemna, from pool, Te Rua Taniwha plain, H. Bay. 
[Azolla rubra]
2580. Orange-colored Fungus, on back of Dacrydium cupressinum
2581. Antennaria-like – fine – on back of ditto. 
2582. Delicate white Fungus, on upper branch of a fallen tree, Te Hautotara forest, R. Manawatu. 
  2582α. Moss with preceding. 
2583. Fungus? on living trees, same forest. 
2584. Lichen, on living Weinmannia, woods, nr head of R. Manawatu. 
2585. ditto		d––––––		d–––––– 
2586. ditto		d–––––– 		d–––––– 
2587. Ditto, Black on living Dacrydium cupressinum
2588. ditto, black-brown, fine, on fallen bark. 
2589. ditto, elegant little sp., on a dead branch. 
2590. Small Moss, with ditto. 
2591. Lichen – Peltidea – on rotten log, different from the N. species of sp. sent. – Same forest – P. Novæ-Zelandiæ W.C. 
2592. Curious Lichen among mosses, – crags, junction of River Tukituki, H. Bay. 
2593. Large spreading Fungus, logs, damp woods. 
2594. Jungermannia, on Aralia crassifolia, head of Wairarapa Valley. 
2595. Frondose Jungermannia;	d–––––– 	d–––––– 
2596. Dry stalked puffball Fungi, growing in clusters, ground, forest, nr. Te Hawera. 
2597. Elegant little Jungerm., on Coriaria gigantea, No. 2484
  2597α. White Lichen, with ditto. 
2598. Small Lichen, on Veronica excelsa, No. 2483
2599.   Ditto		Ditto
2600. Lichen, on Fagus (F. robusta) No. 2478
2601. White Lichen, on ditto – with red – ? on it. 
2602. Jungermannia, on Weinmannia; same locality. 
2603. Lichen,		d–––––– 	d–––––– 
2604. Minute red Jungerm., on Fagus (F. Solandri?)
2605. Minute green ditto, on d–––––– (2 or more sps.)
2606. Jungerm., &c, on No. 2483
2607. Sun-dried – on back of Podocarpus dacrydioides, wood, at Ngawakatatara
2608. Interesting Lichen, on caudex of Niphobolus, from the upper branches of a Tree, banks R. Ruamahanga. 
2609. Small grey Lichen, same branch. 
2610. Lichen,		ditto
2611. Ditto,		d–––––– 
2612. Sundries		d–––––– 
2613. Sphærophoron? on Weinmannia, ditto. 
2614. Scrap on a rotten branch. 
2615. Sticta,   ditto, forest, nr. Ruamahanga R. 
2616. Nephroma, 	d–––––– d–––––– 
2617. Sphærophoron, 	d–––––– 	d–––––– 
2618. Sundries,		d––––––  d–––––– 
2619. Moss, – a scrap only & young, 	d–––––– 
2620. Jungerm. – a scrap on a branch,	d–––––– 
2621. Lichen, on decaying logs,	d–––––– 
2622. A good specimen of No. 2529 – from same spots as that. 
[Centrolepis pallida]
2623. Jungermannia, on trees, forests, Ruahine. 
2624. Moss,		d–––––– 	d––––––. 
2625. Ditto, (elegantissime!)  d–––––– d–––––– 
2626. Jungermannia, 	d–––––– 	d–– J. lineata, W.C. 
2627. Elegant minute Jungerm. 	d–––––– 
2628. Frondose Jungerm.,		d–––––– 
2629. pinnate imbricate, 	   ditto	d–––––– 
2630. Jungerm., on trees, forests, banks, R. Oroua. 
2631. Ditto, on logs		d–––––– 	d–––––– 
2632. Ditto, on logs & trees  d–––––– 	d–––––– 
2633. Moss, on logs & trees,	d–––––	d–––––– 
2634. Small Lichen on ground, & on decaying roots, open down head of Wairarapa Valley
2635. Minute black Lichen, on stones, same locality. 
2636. White Lichen, on stones,	d–––––– 
2637. Brown Lichen, on stones, same locality. 
2638. Black  ditto,		d–––––– 	d–––––– 
2639. Foliaceous ditto,	d–––––– 	d–––––– 
2640. d––––––  d–––––– (perhaps, var. of 2639). d––––––. 
2641. Dark green Conferva?? from sides of brackish-water marshes, sands, nr. Cape Turnagain. It grows in larger beds of several yards – about 2 in high – has a spongy appearance and gives out a horrible stench when drying. 
2642. Small dark green Moss, growing with 2592. 
2643. Minute red Jungermannia, on bark with Thelotrema?
2644. Dark orange-colored Lichen, rocks, R. Pahawa
2645. Black Lichen, 		d–––––. 	d–––––– 
2646. Alga? & Lichen, clay banks. 	d–––––– 	d–––––– 
2647. Alga?	d–––––. 	d–––––– 	d–––––– 
2648. Marchantia, (scrap)		d–––––– 	d–––––– 
2649. Stereocaulon, on conglomerate, rocks, nr Huaangarua: – T. complexum, W.C. 
2650. Parmelia? with preceding. 
2651. White lichen, on living trees, wood, nr. Te Kaikokirikiri Village. Gathered in rain, when it is very apparent. 
2652. Lichen, on clayey earth, Wairarapa. 
2653. Black Antennaria? on Podocarpus spicata; ditto. 
2654. Brownish ditto? on     ditto – always on the dark sides of the trees – from ditto. 
2655. Fine, soft black ditto   on ditto – fm. ditto. 
2656. Emerald green Lichen on log, Wairarapa. 
2657. Lichen             on charred log, ditto. 
2658. Jungermannia, on roots, wet spots, forest, nr. Te Kaikokirikiri village – J. alba, W.C. 
2659. Jungermannia, on roots, under water in streams, same locality as foregoing – J. aquatica, W.C. 
2660. Jung. in bark of Podocarpus Totara, from same wood; (comp. with 2626). 
2661. White foliaceous Lichen, on ditto, from ditto. 
2662. Black Lichen, trees, thickets, Wairarapa; perhaps 2 sp. 
2663. Verrucaria? on Suttonia australis; forest, head of Ruamahanga R. With a delicate red Lichen anastomosing, as in 2601. 
2664. Delicate pulverulent Lichen, on fern-trees. 
2665. Pulverulent lichen, on bark of Metrosideros robusta, forest, nr. Te Hawera. 
2666. Ditto, (perhaps 2 species,)   Same tree. 
2667. Lichens &c, on bark of Podocarpus ferruginea, same wood. 
2668. Moss, on stones, under water, streams, same forest. 
2669. Pulverulent Lichen, on bark of Podocarpus spicata. Same forest. 
2670. White Fungus, on rotten wood, same forest. 
2671. Lichen, on living Ripogonum parviflorum, ditto. 
2672. Pulverulent white Lichen? on rotten branch, ditto. 
2673. Lovely green Moss, on wet logs,  same wood. 
2674. Elegant minute foliaceous Lichen, with 2663. 
2675. Lichen, with ditto. 
  2675α. Small Jungerm., on same. 
2676. Fungus on decaying logs, same wood. beautifully white when fresh. 
2677. Fungus, on rotten wood, same forest. 
2678. Moss, on stones under water, ditto. (Vide, 2668). 
2679. Opegrapha ?australis, W.C. on same tree, as 2663. 
2680. Fungus. Lycoperdon? (white) same wood. 
2681. Ditto – on decaying trees. ditto
2682. Alga on stones under water, streamlets, ditto
2683. Lichen, on bark, dead branch, same wood. 
2684. Scrap of a ditto, on ditto,	d–––––– . 
2685. Lichen, on Suttonia australis No. 2663
2686. Moss &c, on wet logs, forest, nr. Te Hawera. 
2687. Parmelia? a handsome species on upper branches of trees, same forest: P. ?fistulosa, W.C. It may prove to be a Cetraria. 
  2687α. Minute Jungermannia, on preceding. 
  2687β. Larger Jungermannia, on ditto. 
2688. Thelotrema lepadinum? on bark, rotten branches, same wood. 
2689. Elegant Jungermannia, on upper branches of an Olea; ditto. 
2690. Small Jungermannia; ¬¬¬¬¬¬¬———  ditto—— d–––––– 
2691. Fungus. (or rather the remains of such), wet logs,  d–. 
2692. Ditto,  on decaying trees	d––––––. 
2693. Frondose Jungermannia, on grounds, same forest. 
2694. Jungermannia on Fuchsia excorticata, forest nr. Manawatu. 
2695. Peculiar large Lichen, on Laurus Tawa, – forming crustaceous patches, 12-16 ins sq., excessively brittle, fructification beneath. 
2696. Frondose, Jungermannia, on grounds, Pahiatua, nr. Te Hawera. J. furcillaria W.C. – from parallel forking of ribs in dichotomous fronds. 
2697. Conferva? from R. Makakahi, Pahiatua; partly rotten in carrying. 
2698. Jungermannia, on larger Urtica, No. 2481. 
2699. White Lichen on Parsonsia; same wood. 
  2699α. Small scarlet Fungi on ditto;   d–––––– 
2700. Conferva? from R. Mangatainoka, nr. Manawatu. 
2701. Small Jungermannia, on bark; same wood. 
2702. Scrap of a small Lichen, on mosses & dead stalks, from summit of Ruahine. 
2703. Large stout Sticta, on trees, rather scarce; forests, interior. 
2704. Woody Fungus, on Laurus Tawa, nr. Manawatu. 
2705. Scrap of a Lichen (Lecideæ?) on bark, forest, nr. Manawatu. 
2706. Jungermannia, on ditto;  ditto. 
2707. Lichen (Variolaria?) on ditto,		d–––––– 
2708. Parmelia? on ditto, d–––––– 
2709. Cenomyce, on caudex of fern tree; forest, nr. head of River Ruamahanga; very rare & beautiful. (viridis, W.C.)
2710. Parmelia? on Moss, upper branches of a tree, same forest. 
2711. Sphærophoron, a lovely white sp., on Fagus, top of Ruahine T. album, W.C. 
2712. Sphærophoron, a very large species, from upper branch trees, forests, Otara, on River Rangitikei. A tuft which I got, weighed, when fresh, upwards of a pound. S. lacunosum, W.C. 
2713. Sphærophoron, in bark living trees, banks of R. Makakahi, nr. Te Hawera. S. umbilicalum, W.C. 
2714. Sphærophoron, on Knightia excelsa, forests, nr. Manawatu; growing densely cæspitose. T. variegatum, W.C. 
2715. Sphærophoron, a white species, larger fruited than preceding 2-3 apothecia on a frond; from Ruahine. (Doubtless, sent before.) T. excelsum, W.C. 
2716. Sphærophoron tenerum? Vide, yr. illustn. – forests, interior. 
2717. Sph. tenerum large var., grounds, forests, nr. Te Hawera. 
2718. Small Sphærophoron & sundry scraps, Mosses & Lichens; ditto. 
2719. Fine black Fungus on Hymenophyllum; same woods. 
2720. Batrachospermum? – adhering to stones, rivulets forests nr. Manawatu. I send it to you as it is dried badly. B. Novæ-Zealandiæ, W.C. 
2721. Cenomyces, on trees, woods, nr. Manawatu. 
2722. Lichen, (Parmelia), on branch, forest, nr. Te Hawera. 
2723. Jungermannia, an elegant sp. in fruit, on ditto, from ditto. 
2724. Fungus, on ditto, from ditto. 
2725. Parmelia, on ditto, from ditto. 
2726. Small Jungermannia, on d–––––– from d–––––– 
2727. Cladonia, wood, nr Te Hawera. C. robusta, W.C. 
2728. Cladonia, from roots of Fagus, top of Ruahine. (excelsa, W.C.)
2729. Handsome Lichen, on upper branches of a tree, forests, banks of River Rangitikei. 
2730. A small Sphærophoron, from Ruahine, possibly a var. of S. tenerum. 
2731. Sticta? brown sp., from Ruahine. 
2732. Jungermannia?     Ditto
2733. Moss (Hookeria?) Elegant sp., on stones, sides of streams, woods, interior. 
2734. Lichen, on Mataii (Podocarpus spicata), bark; forests, Te Hawera. 
2735. Grey Lichen, with orange-coloured shields, on d– d––
2736. Fungus on bark, wood, Ngawapurua, R. Manawatu. 
2737. Handsome red woody Fungus on living trees & logs; woods. It grows to a much larger size – 2ce or 3ce as large. 
2738. Conferva? from R. Pahawa, E. Coast; blanched a little in drying. 
2739. Lichen, trees, Ruahine. 
2740. Sticta? a ribbed & very fragile sp., adhering horizontally to trees, forests, nr. Ruamahanga, rather scarce. 
2741. Moss, ground, Fagus woods, Ruahine. 
2742. Jungermannia? 	d–––––– 	d–––––– 
2743. Small Moss (Andræa?) stony summits, d–––––– 
2744. Jungermannia, (scrap), Ruahine. 
2745. Black Lichen (Usnea?) summit, d–––––– 
2746. Stereocaulon, a truly beautiful sp., summits, Ruahine: – S. Botrys, W.C. 
2747. Curious Fungus, on Hymenophyllum, woods, interior. 
[Hymenophyllum polyanthos var. sanguinolentum]. [Other specimens are found among the fungi].
  2747α. Jungermannia, parasitical on upper part of d–––––– 
2748. Fine gorgeous Lichen, (worthy a drawing!) Hanging from trees, woods, interior. (Sent before). 
2749. Gelatinous Lichen, found in heaps, under bushes, shingle banks, nr. the sea, H. Bay. 
2750. Woolly Moss, from same locality, in fruit. 
2751. Small (Tremellius-like) Lichen, clayey grounds, Ahuriri, H. Bay. 
2752. Jungermannia on back of Podocarpus dacrydioides, H. Bay. 
2753. Peculiar Fungus, on a fallen Knightia excelsa; forest, nr. Manawatu River. 
2754. Fungus (Antennaria-like) on Veronica nr. Te Hawera. 
2755. Fungus, on fallen trees, nr. Te Hawera. 
2756. Alga, on stones, in current of R. Mangatainoka, nr. Te Hawera. 
2757. Ditto,	d–––––– (different green), 	d––––––. If you can unroll these papyrus scrolls – well, if not, & you wish it, I can get you plenty more. 
2758. Black Fungus (perhaps 2 species). Trees, nr. Te Hawera. 
2759. Ditto, from same. 
2760. A fine unique Fungus, which I had, completely destroyed! – I send, not without vexation; the remainder; – ditto. 
2761. Black Fungus parasl. on ferns, same wood, perhaps same as No. 2759. 
2762. Fungus, I am afraid quite past your skill. – A curious colored species, (starch-blue) 4 found growing together on a rotten log nr Te Hawera; I never saw it before. 
2763. Fungus, on twigs, nr. Te Hawera. 
2764. Ditto, on rotten branch, wood, nr. Manawatu. 
2765. White Lichen, having a curious varnished appearance, on living Podocarpus spicata, wood, Te Hautotara. 
2766. Small Jungermannia, on bark, same tree. 
2767. Grey Lichen, on ditto, ditto, (comp. with 2765). 
2768. Lecidea? on ditto,  ditto. L. Mataii W.C. 
2769. Lecanora? on ditto	  ditto	
2770. Lecanora? on ditto   ditto
2771. Parmelia? on twig of Podocarpus ferruginea. Te Hawera. 
2772. Jungermannia, on Fagus, banks of Ruamahunga R. 
2773. Lecanora? on a fallen top-branch of a Tree, from d–– 
2774. Minute elegant Jungerm. on Knightia excelsa,  d–––– 
2775. Brown Fungus,	d–––––– 		d–––––– 
2776. Black Fungus, on Podocarpus spicata, 	d–––––– 
2777. Lichen, from an old post, plains, head of Wairarapa Valley. 
2778. Ditto,		d–––––– 	d–––––– 
2779. Dark green pendulous coarse Moss, trunks of trees, in forests, nr. Te Hawera; in fruit. 
2780. Delicate white Lichen, parasl. on ditto. 
2781. Sticta, small narrow sp., trees, same woods. 
2782. Fungus, on Metrosideros robusta, 	d–––––– 
2783. Ditto? on a rotten branch,		d–––––– 
2784. Moss (Hookeria?) on stones & gravel in beds of streams, dark forest, nr. Ruamahanga. H. aquatica, W.C. 
2785. Linear pinnatifid Alga, from ditto. 
2786. Broad-fronded amorphous Alga, from ditto. 
2787. Sticta, and another Lichen (stellate Parmelia?), woods, nr. Ruamahanga. 
2788. Jungermannia, & Lichen, on fallen branches, ditto. 
2789. Scrap of a Conferva?, from clear water stream, forest, near Ngaawapurua. 
2790. Peltidea, on Fuchsia excorticata, wood, nr. Te Hawera; a thinner & duller sp. than P. Novæ-Zelandiæ, No. 2591. P. tenuis, W.C. 
2791. Moss, & frondose Jungerm., woods, interior. 
2792. Sticta, on Podocarpus ferruginea, dense forest, banks of R. Makakahi: this sp. grown to a large size, 14-18 inches, across. 
2793. Jungermannia, on same. 
2794. Sticta, on ditto,	ditto. 
2795. Ditto (stout)    d–––––– d––––––
2796. Usnea?——on d–––––– d––––––
2797. Nephroma, on d–––––– d–––––– N. fimbriata, W.C. 
2798. A truly elegant Parmelia, d–––––– d–––––– 
2799. Moss		d––––––  	d–––––– 
2800. Lichen, 		d–––––– 	d–––––– 
2801. Ditto,		d–––––– 	d–––––– 
2802. Ditto, on Moss,	d–––––– 	d–––––– 
2803. Ditto, d–––––– d–––––– 	d–––––– 
2804. Ditto  d–––––– d–––––– 	d–––––– 
2805. Ditto, d–––––– d–––––– 	d–––––– 
2806. Small Jungermannia on branch,	d–––––– 	d–––––– 
2807. Fungus, on rotten roots of Podocarpus spicata, Mission Station.
2808. Red Fungus (Agaricus-like) from forests, interior, perhaps 2 species. Scarce. 
2809. White Fungus on rotten Piper excelsum, Station. 
2810. Fungus (Peziza?) on decayed wood, forest, nr Puehutai, on River Manawatu. 
2811. Jungermannia; from a watercourse, forest, Titiokura; (vide, No. 2536,) a sp. near J. Hymenophyllum but distinct. – J. atronerva, W.C. 
2812. Black Fungus on Podocarpus spicata, woods, interior; always on the wet side of the tree. 
2813. Antennaria? on Suttonia australis, Omoekau, Palliser Bay. 
2814. A – something! – attached to roots, etc, sides of streams, but under water – forests, interior. 
2815. Jungermannia? under water, Te Kapa, nr. H. Bay. 
2816. Fungus, Lilac-colored, on rotten wood, Station, H. Bay. 
2817. Fungus, small black, on wood, nr. Station,	d–––––– 
2818. Orange-colored ditto? on Coprosma nr Cape Kidnapper. 
2819. White Fungus, on bark, rotten branch, wood, nr. Te Hawera. 
2820. Variolaria?  on 	d––––––   d–––––– d–––––– 
2821. Jungermannia? pendulous, on living trees,	d–––––– 
2822. Delicate white Lichen (Sphærophoron?) d–––– d–– –
2823. Dark green Conferva from a small stream, forest, nr. Te Hawera. 
2824. Curious & handsome Lichen, from summit of Ruahine, growing on the earth on overhanging crags, scarce; (with 2743). 
2825. Orange-colored Lichen, on decaying stump, Te Kapa, Hawkes Bay. 
2826. Small Jungermannia; on bark of a decaying tree, nr. the Lake Rotoatara. 
2827. Jungermannia, on charred log,	d–––––– 	d–––––– 
2828. Cladonia, elegant little sp., on decaying logs, ditto. C. formosa. W.C. 
2829. Moss, growing with foregoing: – sent before. 
2830. Lichen, on bark, same locality. 
2831. Small red Jungermannia, on ditto,	ditto. 
2832. Jungermannia, 	     on ditto,	ditto. 
2833. Fungus, on leaves of Geranium, open downs, Hawke’s Bay. 
2834. Cenomyce, on charred log, road to Lake Rotoatara. – C. lepidota, W.C. 
2835. Small Cenomyce, from		ditto	ditto. 
2836. Small Cladonia,		d–––––– 	d–––––– 
2837. Ditto			d–––––– 	d–––––– 
2838. Ditto			d–––––– 	d–––––– 
2839. Ditto,			d–––––– 	d–––––– 
2840. Small Lichen,		d–––––– 	d–––––– 
2841. Orange colored Fungus,	d–––––– 	d–––––– 
2842. Glabrous Cenomyce, open downs, H. Bay. 
2843. Cenomyce? spotted pulverulent sp., d–––––– d–––––
2844. C., perhaps C. aggregata, comp. with 2842, shingle banks, H. Bay. 
2845. C., glabrous sp., – perhaps a var. of preceding; d–––– d–––––– 
2846. C. comp. with 2843 – from shingle banks, nr. the sea. d–––––– 
2847. Cladonia, (Scyphophorus) exilis, W.C. – ditto, elegant little sp. 
2848. Moss from Paripokai, nr. River Wangaehu, Taupo. 	
2849. Ditto, from holes in volcanic rocks, dry downs, Taupo. 
2850. Verrucaria? on back of (dead) Fagus, summits of Ruahine. Scarce. – V. Botrys, W.C. 
2851. Usnea? trees, tops of Ruahine. 
2852. Fungus? (Antennaria-like), on living Fagus, Ruahine
2853. Ditto?	d––––––		d–––––– 	d–––––– 
2854. Black scrap, with foregoing. 
2855. Jungermannia, ground, near summit of Ruahine. 
2856. Ditto,	on living trees, summit,	d–––––– 
2857. Moss,	on ground,  d––––––	d–––––– 
2858. Lichen, on ground,	  d–––––– 	d–––––– 
2859. Jungermannia, from the top of range. 
2860. Small ditto, with preceding. 
2861. Small black Fungus (Leptothyrium?) on culm of grass, margin of – Lake Rotoatara. 
2862. White Fungus on rotten wood, from Ngawakatatara; H. Bay. 
2863. Beautiful colored, Bell-shaped Fungus, pendulous, on rotten stumps, Ngawakatatara. 
2864. Fungus on rotten wood, thickets, nr. Cape Kidnapper. 
2865. Fungus, on ground, among Pteris esculenta, ditto. 
2866. Jungermannia, on Piper excelsum,       ditto. 
2867. Lichen, on Melicytus ramiflorus,         ditto, growing in patch 4-5in. across, but excessively brittle. 
2868. White Fungus on Piper excelsum, from ditto. 
2869. Lichen? ground, heights, nr. Cape Kidnapper. 
2870. Fungus, on rotten log, in watercourse, ditto. 
2871. Cenomyce, on conglomerate, from ditto. 
2872. Parmelia, on   	ditto	 ditto. 
2873. Ditto		d––––––   d–––––– 
2874. Yellowish Lichen, 	d––––––   d–––––– 
2875. Jungermannia, on stones, dry exposed hillocks, nr. Cape Kidnappers. 
2876. Black Fungus, on split-up wood of Corynocarpus lævigata, – from a glen, opposite Bare Island, E. Coast. 
  2876α. White Fungus, on ditto. 
2877. Greenish Antennaria?, on living Friesia racemosa from ditto. 
2878. Black Fungus? in layer patches underneath overhanging & decomposing limestone crags, top of same glen. 
2879. Lichen, on stones, same glen. 
2880. Green Lichen, on bark of Corynocarpus lævigatus, from ditto. 
  2880α. Jungermannia, with ditto. 
2881. Lichen on living, Friesia racemosa, ditto. 
2882. Lichen (Lecidea?) on bark of Corynocarpus lævigatus  ditto. 
2883. Lichen, Moss, &c., from crags, ditto. 
2884. White Fungus on living Fuchsia excorticata, high land nr. the hill Kahuraanake, H. Bay. 
2885. Lichen (Variolaria?) on rotten branch, nr. River Maraetaha, H. Bay. 
2886. Minute Jungermannia, on ditto. 
2887. Scarlet Fungus, on ground, among Pteris esculenta, with 2884. 
2888. Lichen, from crags, same locality as 2876. 
2889. Fungus, white, on stalks (dead), of Pteris esculenta, with 2884
2890. Lichen, from crags, hill Kahuraanake. 
2891. Small stipitate Fungus, on bark of a dead tree, in River Tukituki, H. Bay. 
2892. Lichen on living Veronica, same locality as 2876. 
2893. Fungus, parasitical on a larva, edge of a watercourse, heights, nr Cape Kidnappers; dug out of the ground, & my only specimen. 
2894. Stereocaulon, a small graceful sp., with preceding, on conglomerate. 
2895. Small Cenomyce, with ditto. 
2896. White Lichen, on bark of dead Corynocarpus lævigatus – thickets nr. Cape Kidnapper. 
2897. Black Fungus, on foregoing. –
2898. Alga, watercourse, table-land above Waimarama village, E. Coast. 
2899. Harsh Moss, growing with preceding. 
2900. Jungermannia,	ditto	ditto
2901. Lichen; on Corynocarpus lævigatus, same locality as 2876
2902. Ditto,  on ditto,  colour different & more largely blistered. 
2903. Ditto, on Edwardsia;  ditto, ostioles very plain. But, comp. all three with No. 2695. 
2904. Peltidea, from ground among fern, high land nr. Kahuraanake – specimens not well preserved; a sp. perhaps near P. scutata, judging from the descript. P. maculata., W.C. 
2905. Dead grasshopper with white Fungus on it, same spot. 
2906. Yellow Lichen (Lecanora?), crags, hill Kahuraanake. 
2907. Grey Lichen,  from ditto. 
2908. Black  ditto from ditto. 
2909. Gray ditto (Lecanora?) ditto. 
2910. Small tawny ditto,	    ditto. 
2911. Lichen, – from ditto. 
2912. Lichen, from three localities: –
– α. from crags, same locality as 2876. 
– β. from nr. River Maraetaha. 
– γ. from foot hills Kahuraanake. 
2913. Lichen (Parmelia cæsia?) grows with 2912(β)
2914. Small Lycoperdon, ground, among fern, with 2912(γ). 
2915. Yellow Lichen, with 2912(α), perhaps var. of 2906. 
2916. Black Lichen, on stone, crags, Kahuraanake. 
2917. White Lichen, on Mosses &c.,  ditto. 
2918. Scrap of Cenomyce, & Cledonia, from edge of a salt spring, Kahuraanake; comp. with 2847. 
2919. Orange-coloured Lichen on bark, forest, Ngawakatatara. 
2920. Lecidea? on decomposing sandstone & crags, Kohinurakau. 
2921. Lecidea?   from ditto. 
2922. Orange-colored Lichen, from ditto. 
2923. Small Lecanora?, on Podocarpus dacrydioides, ditto. 
2924. Cenomyce, scarlet apoth., charred logs, Te Kapa. 
2925. Ditto?		ditto. 
2926. Cladonia?		ditto. 
2927. Lecidea?		ditto. 
2928. Cenomyce, 	ditto. – C. custa, W.C. – but must see more of it. 
2929. Dense stony Stereocaulon, from dry volcanic rocks, Taupo, S. sclerosum, W.C. 
2930. Lecanora? from same dry volcanic rocks, Taupo – L. Taupoense, W.C. 
2931. Thelotrema? from summits of Ruahine. T. conglomerata. W.C. 
2932. Sphærophoron, from ditto; S. simplex, W.C. 
2933. Stereocaulon   from ditto; S. minimum, W.C. 
2934. Scrap of a red Moss from ditto. 
2935. Cladonia, from ditto. 
2936. Stereocaulon, ditto. 
2937. Cetraria, from volcanic rocks, dry plains, Taupo. – C. incisa, W.C. 
2938. Cetraria, from ditto, ditto; only 1 specimen bearing shields which I send: C. maculata, W.C. 
2939. Jungermannia, forming large beds, in sand, in iron-water, base of Mountain Ruapehu, Taupo. – J. arenaria, W.C. 
2940. Scrap! of a Jungerm., from summit of Ruahine. A very beautiful object when fresh. I sought for more but was unsuccessful. 
2941. Conferva? waterfall, River Maraetaha, (scarce). 
2942. Ditto? ford, same river. 
2943. Ditto?  watercourse, Glen (of) 2876
2944. Lecidea? on bark of Podocarpus dacrydioides, from Te Pakiaka forest, nr. Mission Station, Hawke’s Bay. 
2945. Jungermannia, on same, bark, Tangoio, H. Bay. 
2946. Thelotrema,  on ditto, from Te Pakiaka. 
2947. Minute Fungus? on ditto,  on ditto. 
2948. Moss, ground, Tangoio. 
2949. Small, Jungerm., on living Myoporum lætum, ditto. 
2950. Small Lichen, on	d–––––– 	d–––––– 
2951. Small Lichen, on living Solanum laciniatum, ditto. 
2952. Ditto,		d–––––– 	d–––––– 
2953. Ditto,		d–––––– 	d–––––– 
2954. Ditto, on back of Podocarpus dacrydioides, Te Pakiaka. 
2955. Curious white Fungus, on underside of Laurus Tawa, (i.e. of charred logs), from ditto – stratum super stratum. 
2956. Gelatinous Lichen, on bark dead shrub, shingle, banks, near Ahuriri Harbour, H. Bay. 
2957. Sticta, on Podocarpus dacrydioides, Hawke’s Bay. A very scarce species. S. villosa, W.C. 
2958. Parmelia? Growing with preceding. 
2959. Black Fungus on Coprosma, with 2956. This Fungus destroys the shrub, and all the smaller vegetation beneath it – giving a most blasted appearance. 
2960. Lichen on Pumice, – from same locality. 
2961. Gyrophora? on d——, d–––––– 
2962. Parmelia parietina? on stones; ditto. 
2963. Parmelia – var. of above? –      ditto; – on pumice. 
2964. Ditto? – with brown fruit –	   ditto. 
2965. Lichen, – from same locality. 
2966. Ditto, on dead twigs, sand, &c., – ditto; unforty. all broken. 
2967. Ditto, on pebbles,		   ditto. 
2968. Ditto, black,  on ditto,       ditto. 
2969. Curious little Lichen (Lecidea?) same locality, on ground. 
2970. Thelotrema? on back of Podocarpus dacrydioides, from Te Pakiaka forest – see 2946. 
2971. Small Cenomyce, growing with 2956, on ground. 
2972. Handsome Lichen (Cetraria?) with foregoing. 
2973. Small Cenomyce, ground, ditto. 
2974. Small Jungermannia, on Lichen, from ditto. 
2975. Small Jungermannia? on sand, 	ditto. 
2976. Cetraria? – an elegant Lichen, from same locality, but not detected bearing shields; grows on twigs, &c. – C. alba, W.C. 
2977. Cetraria, on twigs &c, same locality. 
2978. Stereocaulon, shingle banks, nr. Station. 
2979. Sticta crocata?, on lower branches of shrub, same locality – rarely found bearing shields. 
2980. Handsome foliaceous Lichen, on pumice, ditto. 
2981. Green mossy plant, ground. Ahuriri harbour. 
2982. Lichen (Lecidea?) on cockle shells, shingle banks, H. Bay. 
2983. Scrap of a squamulose Lichen, from ditto. 
2984. Brown Lichen (Parmelia?) on pebble, d–––––– 
2985. Ditto	Ditto		ditto. 
2986. Small Lecidea? on ditto. 
2987. Fungus (Mucor?) on stalk end of head of Maize – from my gardens. 
2988. Pink fungus, on Maize stalk;     ditto. 
2989. Black Sphæria-like Fungus on ditto	ditto. 
2990. Green Conferva-like, Fungus on d——, 	d–––––– 
2991. Minute lemon colored Lichen back of Podocarpus dacrydioides, from Te Pakiaka. 
2992. Small Jungermannia, on ditto. 
2993. White Lichen, on stone, bearing black apoth. from Ahuriri. 
  2993α. Black ditto, on ditto. 
  2993β. Lichen with brown margined apoth. – 	ditto. 
  2993γ. Ditto, with orange colored apoth. –    ditto. 
			All these last 4 on one stone. 
2994. Stereocaulon, from shingle banks, nr Station. S. lacunosum. W.C. 
2995. Minute claret-colored Lichen? on Pumice; ditto. Apparent when wet. 
2996. Various Jungermannia, on bark of Podocarpus dacrydioides from Te Pakiaka forest. 
2997. Lichen, on ditto, from d–––––– 
2998. Small orange-colored Lichen, d——, d—— vide, No. 2919. 
2999. Lichen ground, shingle banks, nr. Ahuriri. 
3000. Handsome Parmelia, on pebbles, from ditto. 
3001. Lichen, on same as 2996, & from thence. 
3002. Ditto, on ditto; – perhaps var. of preceding. 
3003. Ditto, on 	d——, from 	d–––––– 
3004. Minute Ditto,	 d——, 		d–––––– 
3005. Yellow foliaceous Ditto, d——,  d–––––– (poor sp.,)
3006. Grey Lichen
3007. Lichen, on fence, Station. 
3008. Yellow-fruited  d––––––  d–––––– 
3009. Fungus, on         d––––––  d–––––– 
3010. Ascendent Lichen, on d––––––  d–––––– 
3011. Small Moss		)   wee specimens
3012. Ditto		)   from my
3013. Ditto		)   pocket book – forests, 
3014. Minute Jungermannia	)   interior
3015. Another curious Fungus on a larva – from the side of a pool, near the Station – my only sp. 
3016. Another Fungus incrusting a larva, from plains near the Mission Station – my only sp. 
3017. Small black dotted Fungus on culms of Rye grass – Garden
3018. Gyrophora on rotten log, shores, H. Bay: in fruit. 
3019. Small black-green Lichen on ditto. 
3020. Small black-fruited Lichen, on d–––––– 
3021. Small black Lichen, on d–––––– 
3022. Small grey Lichen, on d–––––– 
  3022α Small orange-colored Lichen; on d–––––– 
  3022β. Small black Lichen, on d–––––– 
3023. Minute Lichen, on same log. 
3024. Scrap! Small black Fungus on back of dead Brassica. – from Cape Kidnapper. 
3025. Small Lichen, from damp shaded banks, Cape Kidnapper. 
3026. Marchantia-like plant, from d–––––– 
3027. Lichen, – from ditto. 
3028. Small Moss from d–––––– 
3029. Moss, from d–––––– 
3030. Black sessile, concave, Fungi among fern ditto; I send all. 
3031. Curious sub-gelatinous substance – color, light pink, red, on wet (fresh water) cliffs, Cape Kidnapper. 
3032. Lichen, ground, Cape Kidnapper. 
3033. Lichen, ground, tops of sandy hillocks, ditto: orange, red, when fresh. 
3034. Ditto, 	ditto,	(var. ?). 
3035. Ditto,	ditto,	(var. ?)
3036. Ditto, black-brown, on ground; ditto. 
3037. Ditto, black-fruited, d––––––  d–––––– 
3038. Ditto, black, d––––––  d–––––– 
3039. Ditto, (Pertusaria?) white, spreading, d–––––– d––––
3040. Ditto, smaller sp. (or var.), d––––––  d––––––  d––––
3041. Ditto a large spreading sp., with much larger apoth., generally on stony spots, hillocks, Cape Kidnapper. 
3042. Ditto, on crags, short way above high water mark,  ditto. 
3043. White Fungus, on rotten bark, Mission Station. 
  3043α Black Fungus on d––––––  d–––––– 
3044. White Fungus, on veranda of Mission House. 
3045. Lilac colored Fungus, on roots of Coriaria sarmentosa, Mission Station: (See No. 2816). 
3046. Whitish-brown Fungus? on dead branch from Cape Kidnapper. 
3047. Minute black Fungus immersed solitarily in fence, (Podocarpus dacrydioides) of garden. 
3048. Minute greenish Lichen, same fence. 
3049. Little common Lichen, on fence, – and on Canoes, &c., &c., – common and remarkably fast growth & everywhere fruitful. 
 # __

Algæ, mostly marine. 
3050. Large Griffithsia, with black joints, – E. Coast. 
3051. Small red, ditto, – E. Coast. 
3052. Pale intermediate  ditto; d–––––– 
3053. Sundry ditto;	d–––––– 
3054. Handsome red Alga – Thamnopora, or Plocamium? – E. Coast. 
3055. Ditto
3056. Ditto
3057. Ditto
3058. Ditto
3059. Ditto	
3060. Ditto
3061. Ditto
3062. Ditto
3063. Ditto
3064. Ditto
3065. Ditto
3066. Ditto
3067. Ditto
3068. Red Alga., Thamnopora or Plocamium?; E. Coast. 
3069. Ditto
3070. Ditto
3071. Ditto
3072. Ditto
3073. Ditto
3074. Ditto
3075. Ditto
3076. Ditto
3077. Ditto 
3078. Ditto
3079. Ditto
3080. Ditto; only one specimen found, very scarce: E. Coast. 
3081. Ditto; a truly beautiful sp., only one spn. found; 	d––––––  d–––––– 
3082. Ditto: only a fragment found;		d–––––– 
3083. Ditto; only a fragment found;		d–––––– 
3084. Ditto; only one sp. found – I send you the greater portion; d–––––– 
3085. Ditto; only a fragment – E. Coast. 
3086. Ditto; densely cæspitose growth – only one plant – (See, on – 3159). 
* These last 7 Nos. have sadly lost their colors – owing, I fear, to my having again immersed them in salt water; this, I regret. 
3087. A small blackish species, E. Coast. 
3088. Small alga, d–––––– 
3089. Black ditto, d–––––– 
3090. Violet colored ditto; Hawkes Bay. 
3091. Ptilota formosa – or 2 species; E. Coast. 
3092. Melanthalia abscissa   d–––––– 
3093. Small moss-like Alga rocks, Cape Kidnapper. 
3094. Dark olive, ditto, face of high rocks above high w. mark; Cape Kidnappers. 
3095. Ditto – top of Islet crags, (perhaps id. with precedng.);   ditto. 
3096. Leathery Lichen-like ditto, rocks, C.K. 
3097. Dark green mossy alga, roofs of caves, Cape Kidnapper. 
3098. Reddish ditto, dark caves in moist recesses, d–––––– 
3099. Brownish  ditto, caves, C.K. 
3100. Green ditto, top of crags, C.K. 
3101. Ditto, lighter colored, in plenty on tops and sides of rocks where shags resort, – C.K. – perhaps merely a var. of foregoing. 
3102. Small black globular Alga, on rocks out at sea, C.K. 
3103. Small reddish Alga, sides of caves, C.K. 
3104. Pelocarpus? Sides of tidal rocks, C.K. 
3105. Ditto?     d––––––   (scarce) C.K. 
3106. Ditto?  Scraped out of a pool, in a rock, under water, C.K. 
3107. Ditto? Parasitical on end of fronds of No. 3373. C.K. 
3108. Small dark-green Alga on clayey rocks, C.K. 
3109. Minute olive-colored ditto, on d––––––  C.K. 
3110. Minute black alga (Rhodomela?) tidal rocks, C.K. 
3111. Minute brown d–––––– (Rhodomela spinella?) d––––  d–––––
3112. Small Alga, tidal rocks. C.K. 
3113. Ditto, parasitical on Corallina, d––––––  C.K. 
3114. Elegant plumose Alga, red when fresh, sands among tidal rocks, C.K. 
3115. Small alga, parasitical, C.K. 
3116. Tiny alga, tidal rocks, C.K. 
3117. Black d–––––– (Polysiphonia)? d––––––  d–––––– 
3118. Crimson	d–––––– , parasl. on No. 3136. 
3119. Elegant wing plumose sp., dark red, tidal rocks, d–––
3120. Ditto
3121. Violet colored ditto – from ditto. 
3122. Ditto (more dense) d–––––– 
3123. Small olive-colored Alga, fm. d–––––– 
3124. Narrow Laminaria-like d–––  d––––: (Tidal rocks). 
3125. Common green Filiform Alga, d––––––  d–––––– 
3126. Prostrate frondose Alga, d––––––    d–––––– 
3127. Small black Alga; on Patella, tidal rocks, C.K. 
3128. Small filiform, plumose, Alga, d––––––  d––––––  (comp. 3120) 
3129. Alga, (Rhodomela?) dense tufts, d–––––– d–––––– 
3130. Ditto
3131. Handsome red Alga (Plocamium?) tidal rocks, C.K. 
3132. Ditto, H. Bay
3133. Rhodomela ? parasitical, H. Bay. 
3134. Ditto	H. Bay. 
3135. White plumose Alga  d–––––– 
3136. Alga (Rhodymenia?) H. Bay. 
3137. Small hairy black-brown alga, tidal rocks, H. Bay. 
3138. Small red ditto, d–––––– 
3139. Truly elegant dark violet plumose sp., tidal rocks, H. Bay. 
3140. Ditto  (perhaps var. only of foregoing.)
3141. Dark olive, Alga, parasl. on Corallina, tidal rocks, H. Bay. 
3142. Light-brown, ditto, on stems of larger Alga, d––  d––
3143. Ditto, on clayey rocks, C. Kidnapper. 
3144. Emerald Green minute Alga, on large Alga; detected by its brilliant bright colour; H. Bay. 
3145. Moniliform green Alga, parasl? on Tonaria, &c., Cape K. 
3146. Elegant parasl? Alga, scarlet when fresh, H. Bay. 
3147. Creeping frondose Alga, tidal rocks, H. Bay
3148. Green circular Alga, d–––––– d–––––– 
3149. Green Alga, H. Bay. 
3150. Dark-green Lichen-like, Alga, rocks washed by spray, C.K. 
3151. Orange-colored Fungoid Alga, tidal rocks: – a bad sp. being torn by Natives who collected it. 
3152. Red ditto, on ditto. 
3153. Small black Alga, parasl.? on Blossevillea, H. Bay. 
3154. Small creeping black Alga, on tidal rocks, H. Bay – Scarce. 
3155. Graceful small filiform green sp., H. Bay. Scarce. 
3156. Green Alga, tidal rocks, Cape Kidnapper; very scarce. 
3157. Small red Alga (Ceramium?) parasitical on Carpophyllum, H.B. 
3158. Solitary sessile round bladdered Alga, tidal rocks & parasit? C.K. 
3159. Alga, cæspitose densely fruited sp., tidal rocks nr C.K. – loses its color remarkably soon. (See 3086)
3160. Succulent Alga, tidal rocks with preceding & like that loses its color remarkably soon. 
3161. Flattened cylindrical alga, with former. 
3162. Large dark alga, pendulous on tidal rocks, C.K., (see No. 3124)
3163. Plumose alga. parasl. on Blossevillea, H. Bay. 
3164. Carmine Alga, parasl. on Sargassum, H. Bay. 
3165. Long ribband-like Alga, growing on rocks nr lower water mark, C.K. 
3166. Small black harsh species, tidal rocks, C.K. (Melanthalia?)
3167. Hairy-like species, tidal rocks, C.K. 
3168. Small mossy hairy black sp., clayey rocks, C.K. 
3169. Brown fungus-like Alga on tidal rocks, C.K. 
3170. Black Polysiphonia? Rocks, C.K. 
3171. Small brown Ditto? d––––––  C.K. 
3172. Violet-colored Alga (Dasya?) Small sp. C.K. 
3173. Small black Alga, parasl. on 3166. 
3174. Small black Alga, tidal rocks, C.K. (Perhaps 2 sp.)
3175. Small Alga, tidal rocks (Scrap), C.K. 
3176. Ditto,	   d––––––  d–––––– 
3177. Ditto,	   d––––––  d–––––– 
3178. Ditto,	   d––––––  d–––––– 
3179. Ditto. Parasl? on Corallina,	d——. 
3180. Ditto, small sp. Tidal rocks, d–––––– 
3181. Ditto, plumose sp., parasl? on Sargassum, H.B. 
3182. Olive-colored hairy Alga, tidal rocks, C.K. (vide, 3123). 
3183. Red Mossy Alga tidal rocks, C K. (vide, 3138)
3184. Small hairy d––––––  d–––––– 
3185. Small hair-like species, tidal rocks, C.K. 
3186. Ditto	d–––––– 	d–––––– 
3187. Minute greenish ditto,	d–––––– 
3188. Olive-colored Conferva-like, 	d–––––– (a mere scrap; I lost my specs.) 
3189. Drooping filiform Polysiphonia? 	d–––––– 
3190. Small red Alga parasl on Carpomitræ; H. Bay. 
3191. Black Polysiphonia? tidal rocks, H. Bay. 
3192. Soft, fine Alga, 	d–––––– 
3193. Alga, 		d–––––– 
3194. Ditto		d–––––– 
3195. Ditto		d–––––– 
3196. Finely cut implexed bushy Gelidium? 	d–––––– 
3197. Broad fronded obtuse. Gelidium, tidal pools, C.K. 
3198. Transparent ditto. C.K. 
3199. Small violet-colored Alga, (Dasya ? parasitical) H. Bay. 
3200. Green Conferva-like Alga, smaller & darker than 3125; clayey rocks, C.K. 
3201. Alga – only specimen, & that not perfect – H. Bay. 
3202. Alga – ditto, which I divide – H. Bay. 
3203. Ditto (Rhodomela?) parasitical, rocks, H. Bay. 
3204. Ditto, minute species forming patches,  d––– d–––
3205. Ditto, parasl in Corallina, H. Bay. 
3206. Ditto, tidal rocks, H. Bay. 
3207. Ditto, on Lepas, &c, d–––––– d–––––– 
3208. Ditto, t. rocks, H. Bay. 
3209. Ditto, 	d–––––– 		   )   doubtless
3210. Ditto,	d–––––– 		   )   identical
3211. Ditto, parasl on Corallina, H. Bay.  )   with some of
3212. Ditto, t. rocks, H. Bay. 	 	   )   foregoing
3213. Ditto, parasl. on Blossevillea, H. Bay
3214. Elegant reddish species, parasl, and on t. rocks, H. Bay. 
3215. Small Alga, tidal rocks nr. Cape Kidnapper. 
3216. Black, hairy, ditto	d–––––– 	d–––––– 
3217. Olive-colored conferva–like Alga, outer rocks, Cape K. 
3218. A battered washed specimen, shores, H. Bay – I supposed this to be id. with 3146. perhaps an allied sp. 
3219. Scraps; H. Bay. 
3220. Ditto,	d–––––– 
3221. Ditto	d–––––– 
3222. Ditto,    d––  (resembling Nitophyllum gmelini.). 
3223. Large amorphous dark green fungoid, spreading Alga, outer rocks, Cape Kidnapper. 
3224. Polysiphonia? parasl. on Sargassum, H. Bay. 
3225. Ditto	   d–––––– 	      H. Bay. 
3226. Ditto	   d–––––– 	    d–––––– 
3227. Ditto,	   d–––––– 	    d–––––– 
3228. Ditto	 Tidal Rocks	    d–––––– 
3229. Ditto	   d–––––– 	    d–––––– 
3230. Ditto, Parasitical on Sargassum, d–––––– 
3231. Small Alga, tidal rocks, H. Bay. 	) 
3232. Ditto,	   d––––––   d–	)
3233. Elegant finely-cut red Alga,  d––	) 
3234. Ditto		  d–––––	)
3235. Ditto		  d–––––	)   Perhaps all
3236. Small Alga,	tidal rocks d––––– 	)   these are
3237. Ditto		  d–––––	)   in
3238. Ditto  perhaps 2 sp.  	  d–––––	)   foregoing
3239. Ditto  perhaps 2 sp.   	  d–––––	)   Nos. 
3240. Minute Alga, parasl. on Sargassum  d–––––– 
3241. Ditto,	d––––––  d––––––  d–––––– 
3242. Corallina? tidal rocks,  Cape Kidnappers. 
3243. Ditto	d–––––– 	d–––––– 
3244. Corallina? tidal rocks,  Cape Kidnappers
3245. Ditto	  d–––––– d–––––– 
3246. Ditto	  d–––––– d–––––– 
3247. Ditto	  d–––––– d–––––– 
3248. Ditto	  d–––––– d–––––– 
3249. Ditto (small)	  d–––––– d–––––– 
3250. Scrap of a white fungoid species, tidal rocks, C.K. 
3251. Tonaria, t. rocks, C.K: (gathered specimens). 
3252. Alga	  d–––––– d–––––– d–––––– 
3253. Rhodymenia? (a lovely species). H. Bay – (vide., 3393, 3489). 
3254. Ditto	H. Bay. 
3255. Ditto, (perhaps a var. of precedg?) – H. Bay. 
3256. Ditto,   d–––––– 
3257. Large bladdered moniliform Alga, clayey rocks nr. Cape Turnagain (but a sorry specimen). 
3258. Water bladdered Alga, tidal rocks nr. Cape Turnagain. 
3259. Small hairy Alga, (scrap). d–––––– 
3260. Alga, t. rocks. E. Coast. 
3261. Ditto, d–––––– d–––––– 
3262. Ditto, d–––––– d–––––– 
3263. Ditto, handsome scarlet, carmine sp., parasl on Gelidium from nr. Castle Point – scarce. (But, see, 3309). 
3264. Small tufted species, rocks, nr. C. Turnagain. 
3265. Minute red Alga, 	d–––––– 
3266. Small black tufted sp., E. Coast. 
3267. Alga, (like Iridea – but smooth, thick,) only 1 good spn., from Cape Turnagain. 
3268. Large Alga, H. Bay. common. 
3269. Larger  ditto,	d–––––– d–––––– (perhaps a var. of prec.). 
3270. Larger Griffithsia, E. Coast. 
3271. Epineuron Colensoi. E. Coast, rather scarce, only 1 large sp. 
3272. Alga, (Laurencia?) tidal rocks, E. Coast. 
3273. Ditto  fine stout sp., d–––––– d–––––– 
3274. Ditto (see No. 3160), d–––––– d–––––– 
3275. Ditto, (a bad specimen) d–––––– d–––––– 
3276. Large red Alga, E. Coast. 
3277. Ditto, 	     d–––––– (scarce)
3278. Ditto, 	     d–––––– d–––––– 
3279. Ditto, 	     d–––––– d–––––– 
3280. Ditto, 	     d–––––– 
3281. Ditto, 	     d–––––– (see 3276)
3282. Red Nilophyllum	E. Coast. 
3283. Ditto, 		d–––––– 
3284. Ditto, 		d–––––– 
3285. Small red, Parasl. on Gelidium, E. Coast. 
3286. Small red Nitophyllum E. Coast
3287. A truly beautiful Alga – perhaps “Rhodomenia Hombroniana.” I have a magnificent specimen of this, 2 feet long, but unfortunately (through the stupidity of one of my baggage-bearers), it has been left at a Native village a long way off. Perhaps there are 2 species here. 
3288. An elegant Alga, and which is pretty plentiful but rarely to be found in fruit. It loses its color almost directly. 
3289. Alga, E. Coast. 
3290. Small ditto, parasl. on No. 3416, E. Coast. 
3291. Alga, H. Bay – eaten by the Natives, (see. 3379). 
3292. Small Alga, parasl. on foregoing. 
3293. Ditto, 		d–––––– 
3294. Ditto, 		d–––––– 
3295. Ditto, 		d–––––– 
3296. Handsome red Alga (Plocamium?) with ditto. 
3297. Plumose Alga, E. Coast. 
3298. Small Alga, parasl. on Gelidium, E. Coast. 
3299. Cord-like Alga, H. Bay: (See, 3394). 
3300. Carpomitræ, E. Coast, & H. Bay. 
3301. Minute green Alga, parasl. on stems of ditto. 
3302. Tonasia, E. Coast. 
3303. Small Alga, parasl. on stems of ditto. 
3304. Ditto, pl. on roots of ditto. 
3305. Nitophyllum: on stems of ditto
3306. Small black Tonasia? – Coast. 
3307. Alga, E. Coast. 
3308. Minute Alga, on stems of foregoing. 
3309. Handsome red Alga, – same as 3263, these better specimens. 
3310. Black bushy Polysiphonia? E. Coast. 
3311. Alga, E. Coast. 
3312. Ditto, d–––––– 
3313. Ditto, d–––––– (scarce) – parasl. on Gelidium. 
3314. Red Alga, d–––––– 
3315. Elegant little Alga, d–––––– 
3316. Small Alga, d–––––– 
3317. Ditto, d–––––– 
3318. Ditto, d–––––– 
3319. Sundry small Alga, 	d–––––– 
3320. Small reddish d–––––– d–––––– 
3321. Ditto, on Gelidium		d–––––– (again!)
3322. Small dense Alga, – on Sphacelaria funicularis? – E. Coast. 
3323. Ditto, parasl. on Carpophyllum – E. Coast. 
3324. Dense Alga, tidal rocks, E. Coast  (2 spns?)
3325. Ditto
3326. Ditto
3327. Ditto	
3328. Minute ditto, parasl. on No 3378, from nr. Cape Turnagain. 
3329. Small black Alga, on Carpophyllum, E. Coast. 
3330. Small black Alga, E. Coast – scarce. 
3331. Ditto           E. Coast
3332. Ditto, on Sargassum plumosum, E. Coast. 
3333. Ditto E. Coast. 
3334. Ditto, parasl. on Sargassum plumosum, & on tidal rocks. 
3335. Ditto, parasl. on Carpophyllum? (2 sp.?)
3336. Ditto, E. Coast. 
3337. Ditto, d–––––– 
3338. Ditto, d–––––– tidal rocks. 
3339. Ditto, d–––––– d–––––– 
3340. Ditto, d–––––– d–––––– 
3341. Ditto, on Carpophyllum? E. Coast. 
3342. Ditto, tidal rocks, E. Coast. 
3343. Scraps, inner harbour, Ahuriri, H. Bay. 
3344. Dark violet-colored Alga, parasl. on Sargassum?, E. Cast. 
3345. Alga (Ceramium?) parasl. on Carpophyllum? d––––
3346. Green Alga, parasl, only 1 specimen, E. Coast. 
3347. Green succulent Alga, E. Coast: vide, 3412. 
3348. Alga, (Laurencia?) inner harour, H. Bay. 
  3348α Small ditto, parasl. on foregoing. 
3349. Alga, (Laurencia?) E. Coast – bad specimens & possy. 2 sp. 
3350. Ditto – a slender sp., d–––––– 
3351. Ditto – very slender – d–––––– 
3352. Ditto – parasitical – d–––––– 
3353. Ditto – slender green sp. – all I have: E. Coast. 
  3353α. Ditto – a half-rotten sp., all I have; d–––––– 
3354. Black bushy Alga, – half rotten!  d–––––– 
3355. Laurencia? Rocks, E. Coast: – vide, 3252. 
3356. Ditto? parasitical, E. Coast. 
3357. Sundry scraps –   d–––––– 
3358. Red tree-like Alga, E. Coast – Never yet found a perfect spn. 
3359. Ribband-like Alga, (Halymenia?) of which I have only 3 fronds, all imperfect. I send to you, one barren & 5/6ths of the fruitful frond (perhaps 2 sp?) parasl on Corallina. 
3360. Large irregular-shaped Halymenia? only one frond which I share, sending you 2/3rds of it. Also, a scrap of another. 
3361. 2 Scraps of Halymenia? (perhaps 2 sp.) to you only. 
3362. Scraps of Iridea micans? – these I send to Dr. Harvey only. 
3363. Carpophyllum maschalocarpum to Dr. Harvey only. (see on). 
3364. Marginaria? – grows very large from S. of Castle Point. 
3365. Crimson Alga, parasl. on Carpophyllum. (Possy. 2 sp.) E. Coast. 
3366. Ctenodus Billardieri, E. Coast, common. 
3367. Phyllospora quercifolia – from E. Coast & H. Bay. 
3368. Sargassum plumosum, H. Bay. 
3369. Black Polysiphonia? on ditto. 
3370. Blossevillea; Cape Kidnapper, scarce, these. 
3371. Ditto	d––––––  (this grows much larger). 
3372. Carpophyllum maschalocarpus, Cape Kidnapper; none to Dr. Harvey, as I would not break the sp. 
3373. Large erect Alga, outer rocks, Cape K. –  scarce these, & bad as it is, got at risk of life!
3374. Sargassum plumosum?  Cape K. 
3375. Sargassum?  Cape K. – (big leaves always at base). 
3376. Sargassum?  H. Bay. – perhaps var. of preceding. 
3377. Sargassum vulgare? – H. Bay. 
3378. Handsome alga, rocks, nr. Cape Turnagain – eaten by the Natives. (My silk handkerchief torn by it!)
3379. Ditto, rocks, E. Coast. 
3380. Alga, rocks, E. Coast. 
3381. Ditto, d––––––  d–––––– (see, 3100) – only one specimen of this – of which I send 2, pinnules to Dr. Harvey. 
3382. Dirty-white plumose Alga, E. Coast. 
3383. Small tufted Alga, from Parimahu, nr. Cape Turnagain. 
3384. Purple-black Alga, E. Coast. 
3385. Greenish Alga, tidal rocks, Cape Kidnapper. 
3386. Ditto, lighter color & denser, E. Coast. 
3387. Ditto, coarser with larger ramuli, E. Coast, only one sp. 
3388. Ditto, coarse shaggy sp., E. Coast. 
3389. Ditto, coarse sp., E. Coast; only one sp. 
3390. Ditto, green, E. Coast. – possibly the last of Nos. may be only vars. of one species. 
3391. Fine Alga, E. Coast; 	(see 3488). 
3392. Ditto,   	Ditto:	(d––––––). 
3393. Ditto	d——  	(see 3253 & 3489)
3394. Cord-like Alga, Hawkes Bay; (see 3299). 
3395. Ditto,       E. Coast. 
3396. Long ribband-like Alga, tidal rocks, nr. Cape Turnagain (see [3165]). 
3397. Alga, rocks, E. Coast. 
3398. Stout black Alga, rocks nr. Cape Turnagain, scarce, only 2 sps. 
3399. Brown Alga, – a battered specimen, – scarce, only met with 2 sps. 
3400. Alga, only a tuft of this; E. Coast. 
3401. Ditto, parasitical, – E. Coast. 
3402. Dark-purple proliferous Alga; E. Coast. 
3403. Cord-like Alga, E. Coast. 
  3403α. Small Alga, parasitical on ditto. 
3404. Ditto, tidal rocks, Tuingara, nr. Cape Turnagain. 
3405. Green velvetty Alga, E. Coast; one specimen only
3406. Long light-green serrated Alga, pools, nr Castle Point beach specimens, & lost their color very soon. 
3407. Light green Conferva? rocks, Wareama, nr. Castlepoint. 
3408. Ditto, from Owahanga River, near the mouth; perhaps 2 species. 
3409. Common green Alga, E. Coast. 
3410. Green verticillate Alga, E. Coast. 
3411. Ditto, branched; – E. Coast. only 2 specimens. 
3412. Ditto, succulent, scarce, always imperfect; E. Coast: See 3347. 
3413. Ditto, moniliform, long; E. Coast – (vide, 3145). 
3414. Ditto,	ditto,	short,  d–––––– 
3415. Claret-colored bushy Alga; E. Coast. 
3416. Ditto, (compressed?)  d–––––– 
3417. Greenish ditto,  E. Coast. 
3418. Brown-red ditto, 3-sided; E. Coast: 2 specimens only. 
3419. Variegated ditto, 4-sided; d–––––– 1 specimen only. 
3420. Ptilota?, a battd. sp., but appy. diffg. from Pt. formosa  E. Coast. 
3421. Alga; only 1 sp. of this peculiar plant; E. Coast. 
3422. Elegant red Alga, E. Coast. 
3423. Small red Alga, parasl on Blossevillea; E. Coast. 
3424. Red Alga, parasl; E. Coast. 
3425. Olive-green Conferva-like; E. Coast. 
3426. Darker green   ditto;    E. Coast. 
3427. Finely cut Alga, E. Coast; only 1 sp. 
3428. Reddish Ditto,  d–––––– 
3429. Small Dasya-like Alga, parasl. on Gelidium; E. Coast
3430. Smaller   ditto,  parasitical; E. Coast. 
3431. Small black species, parasl. on 3378. 
3432. Ditto,		d–––––– 
3433. Ditto, rocks, nr. Cape Turnagain. 
3434. Red parasitical Alga; similar to No. 3422; E. Coast. 
3435. Minute parasl. Alga, on Gelidium; E. Coast. 
3436. Small Alga, (Ceramium?) parasitical on Carpophyllum, Cape Kidnapper, on No. 3372, to yourself). 
3437. Fine red Alga; E. Coast; similar to 3424. 
3438. Small red Nitophyllum? parasl on same as 3436 – to you. 
3439. Small black Alga, parasl. on Blossevillea; E. Coast, only 3 sps. 
3440. Small red Alga, parasl on Sargassum;   ditto
3441. Dirty-green Conferva-like, E. Coast. 
3442. Small Nitophyllum: E. Coast. 
3443. Larger Ditto? – E. Coast: only 1 good sp. wh. I divide with you. 
3444. Alga, – E. Coast. only 1 sp., I send half to you, none to Dr. H. 
3445. Ditto,	Ditto. 
3446. Small red Alga, rocks, E. Coast. 
3447. Sargassum, E. Coast; appy. distinct from plumosum. 
3448. Sargassum plumosum, H. Bay – (same as 3368). 
3449. Ditto,	 denser foliage, ditto. 
3450. Ditto a finely cut species, d––––––; ( send just all.)
3451. Blossevillea, H. Bay. 
3452. Ditto, a scrap, to you only; E. Coast. 
3453. Ditto, a scrap, to you only; d–––––– 
3454. Carpophyllum, E. Coast. 
3455. Ditto, slenderer plant having smaller leaves, E. Coast. 
3456. Ditto, larger sp., H. Bay. 
3457. Ditto? H. Bay; quite near to me & scarce. 
3458. Ditto?  E. Coast, I send all. 
3459. Ditto?	d–––––– 	scarce. 
3460. Fucus? E. Coast; (perhaps 2 sp.) – vide, Nos. 3375, 6, 7. 
3461. Blossevillea, E. Coast: perhaps id. with 3370
3462. Tonaria, H. Bay  (vide, 3251). 
3463. Brown cord-like Alga, H. Bay; scarce. 
3464. Small Alga, parasitical on Sargassum, H. Bay. 
3465. Small red Nitophyllum? on ditto, E. Coast. 
3466. Ditto, (2 species) parasl. on Carpophyllum, E. Coast. 
3467. Branches of Carpophyllum, margins of leaves bearing the appearance of fern – (Notholæna)-like fructifn. 
3468. Green Alga, parasl. on Sargassum; E. Coast. 
3469. Black ditto,	d––––––     d–––––– 
3470. Small Nitophyllum? on Gelidium, d–––––– 
3471. Short stout red Griffithsia? on ditto – of which I have only 3 small specimens – possible a young state of 3050. 
3472. Small dark Alga; on stems of Gelidium; E. Coast. 
3473. Minute Alga, on tips of fronds of Gelidium; d–––––– 
3474. Light-violet colored ditto on  ditto. 
3475. Long ditto    on ditto. 
3476. Dense ditto   on ditto. 
3477. Peculiar graceful red-brown filmy Alga, parasl. on d–
3478. Sundry Alga, parasl. on Gelidium. 
3479. Small dark-colored ditto, on d–––––– 
3480. Gracilaria? (in fruit)) H. Bay. 
3481. Gelidium, broad fronded obtuse; rosy red sp., – vide, 3197. 
3482. Ditto, reddish, finely cut sp. 
3483. Ditto, red-brown, green & variegated; the common sp., or var. 
3484. Ditto; – a scarce sp. or var. 
3485. Ditto, long simple-fronded rosy-red sp. or var. 
3486. Red Alga (Plocamium?) parasl. on Gelidium; E. Coast. 
3487. Small Alga (2 species?) E. Coast. 
3488. Beautiful rose colored Delesseria? H. Bay: vide., 3391, 2. 
3489. Carmine, spotted Alga, H. Bay: see Nos. 3253, 3393. 
3490. Small red Nitophyllum? base of stems of Alga, scarce; E.C. 
3491. Small Delesseria? on stems of Alga, scarce, always imperfect & half-rotten. 
3492. Ditto? – larger than preceding; but I have only seen very imperfect specimens; the 2 scraps which I send may possibly prove to be 2 species. 
3493. Red Alga, E. Coast; perhaps only a battered sp. of some of the foregoing Nos. 
3494. Green branched Alga, inner harbour, Ahuriri, H. Bay. 
3495. Green simple ditto, from ditto; possibly 2 species, little though it is. –
3496. Red elegant Alga, serrated under receptacle-leaf; H. Bay. Only 1 sp. which I cut into 3; doubtless same as 3084. 
3497. Elegant red Alga; scarce; H. Bay. 
3498. Ditto (Plocamium?) tidal rocks, E. Coast. 
3499. Ditto, d–––––– 	d–––––– 
3500. Small Alga, on Corallina; E. Coast. 
3501. Orange-colored Tree-like Alga? – H. Bay. 
3502. Curious cream-colored semi-sponge-like substance, H. Bay: only 1 sp. 
3503. Curious half-sandy Alga??  E. Coast. 
3504. Ditto, parasl. on Melanthalia, H. Bay. &c. 
3505. Scrap, semi-sponge-like substance; Coast. 
3506. Red Fuschia-like – H. Bay. 
3507. White slender Coral-like erect, ditto. 
3508. Ditto —— plumose –  	ditto
3509. White Honey-comb-like, encrusting stems of Alga, d– 
3510. Handsome, white Corallina, tidal rocks, nr. Cape Turnagain. 
3511. Elegant green ditto,		d–––––– 
3512. Dirty green small ditto,	d–––––– 
3513. Reddish small ditto,	d–––––– 
  3513α Alga, parasl. on ditto. 
3514. Simple slender reddish Corallina, E. Coast. 
3515. Slender branched  ditto,	d–––––– 
3516. Corallina, E. Coast. 
3517. Alga, on ditto. 
3518. Ditto. 
3519. Ditto. 
3520. Reddish Corallina, E. Coast. 
3521. Reddish Corallina, E. Coast. 
3522. Red plumose Corallina-like, E. Coast. 
3523. Small red Nitophyllum? E. Coast; only 1 specimen. 
3524. Gracilaria? – perhaps id. with 3480. 
3525. Cord-like Alga, branched; H. Bay. 
3526. Sub-shiny animal-like substance, H. Bay. When fresh the interstices are filled with a red gelatinous matter, which stinks horribly as it dries. It grows large, globular. 
3527. A leaf from a large upright Alga – similar to 3269, – leaves narrower, longer, of a lighter color, and scarcely serrate, H. Bay. 
3528. A scrap of a soft sp. of Rhodomela; H. Bay. 
3529. Ditto of a little reddish Alga;     ditto. 
3530. Green woolly – Conferva-like plant, low spots; Mission Station. 
3531. Dark-green Conferva? watercourse, nr. Cape Kidnapper. 
3532. Brown-black Alga, in dried-up pools, top of islet crags, d——. 
3533. Round green sub-gelatinous Alga, on stones, under water, Tangoio River, H. Bay. 
3534. Alga, on a mussel shell, Ahuriri Harbour. 
3535. Ditto (Laurencia?)   on ditto. 
3536. Sundry Scraps, H. Bay. 
3537. Green Ulva? drain, field, Mission Station. 
3538. Green Conferva? attached to bottom of Canoe – fresh, or brackish water, Mission Station. 
3539. A small Alga, parasitical on Nos. 3859, 3860, – dredged up from 2 fathom water, harbour, Ahuriri H. Bay. 

Lichens, &c

3540. Orange-colored Lichen, on Plagianthus, Mission Station. Cetraria ? aurata, W.C. 
3541. Grey Lichen, on ditto. 
3542. Ramalina, on ditto. 
3543. Ditto on d–––––– 
3544. Smooth stalked Lycoperdon? – Garden. 
3545. Rough sub-sessile  	Ditto,	d–––––– 
3546. Larger		Ditto,	d–––––– 
3547. Nasty	Ditto,	d––––––; perhaps var. of 354
3548. Pear-shaped, Ditto, growing in clusters in the winter; garden. 
3549. Thin-skinned small species, also in winter; garden. 
3550. Agaricus?  Garden. 
3551. Ditto,	d––––––; (perhaps 2 sp.)
3552. Ditto, hairy sp., d–––––– 
3553. Fossil seeds, in a lump of Peat, H. Bay. 
3554. Green pulverulent Lichens, with 3540. 
3555. Minute black dotted Ditto, d–––––– 
3556. Aseroe – from Te Hawera. I regret greatly their being destroyed by mites, I hope to send better; that marked α is the usual size when fully grown. (See No. 2182) – A. fœtidissima, W.C. (Your A. viridis, was not full-grown: Kaipatiki, not “kaipatika”)
3557. Moss, woods, interior, on decaying logs. 
3558. Fungus? under side of a Fagus leaf – woods, Ruahine. 
3559. Jungermannia, ground, Station. 
3560. Astelia, Young fruit only, from a dell nr Motukino, Taupo; leaves wide & long. 
3561. Asplenium, from shingle banks, Hawke’s Bay – certainly distinct from flabellifolium, Sent already. 
3562. Small Hymenophyllum, rocks, River Makororo. 
3563. Large Moss, under water, rivulets, forests, near Te Hawera. 
3564. A plant from Waitangi River – sent before. 
[Ruppia maritima]
3565. Grammitis, mountain woods, interior. 
3566. Clematis – the only flower! from the large species River Makaroro, Ruahine, see, No. 
3567. Opercularia? dry plains, banks River Rangitikei. 
[Haloragis micrantha]
3568. Little Gymnogramma, among fern, Cape Kidnapper – G. viridis, W.C., it may, however, prove to be only a var. of G. Novæ-Zelandiæ. 
3569. A lot of scraps; – Jungermanniæ, &c. 
3570. Ditto, ––––––––  Lichens, &c., from the interior. 
[Luzulus colensoi]   [found amongst lichens under this number]
3571. Moss, ground, Station. 
3572. Curious little Grey bead-like Fungus ground, Garden; excessively brittle, filled with a black powder. 
3573. A stone from a stream in Te Hawera wood; something minute upon it in little tufts. 
3574. Fruit of a Fagus, 	———
[F. solandri]
3575. Dark-brown Lichen (Parmelia), with large fruit, from shingle banks, nr Mission Station. 
3576. Scrap portion of (interior) of a large Fungus old; see 2199. 
3577. Jungermannia, in fruit, garden. 
3578. Moss, with ditto. 
3579. White Fungus on rotten Podocarpus spicata, H. Bay. 
3580. Fungus (reddish when fresh), roots of grass, Station. 
3581. Green Alga, Garden. 
3582. Lecidea? on bark, from my garden fence. 
3583. Small Lichens,	ditto,	d–––––– 
3584. Ditto,		ditto,	d–––––– 
3585. Ditto,		d–––––– 	d–––––– 
3586. Ditto,		d–––––– 	d–––––– 
3587. Thelotrema, small sp., d––––––  d–––––– 
3588. Lichen (Opegrapha?)    d––––––  d–––––– 
3589. Minute olive-green Lichen, on bark, from Garden fence. 
  3589α. Small Jungermannia, on ditto. 
3590. Lichen (Cetraria?) on bark of Podocarpus dacrydioides. 
3591. Minute reddish Lichen? on bark, from Garden fence. 
3592. Small Jungermannia, on ditto: perhaps same as 3580α. 
3593. Lichen (Opegraphia)   	d–––––– garden fence. 
3594. Ditto, on bark,	d–––––– 
3595. Ditto, on wood of Podocarpus dacrydioides; (Young of 3590?)
3596. Stipitate black Fungus? on ditto. )
3597. Black dot Fungus? on ditto.         ) possibly only 1 sp. 
3598. Orange-brown ditto?	               )
3599. Lichen, &c, bark; H. Bay. 
3600. Ditto,	d–––––– 
3601. Black Fungus? on
3602.     Ditto? on bark of Podocarpus dacrydioides, H. Bay. 
3603. White Fungus, on ditto. 
3604. Lichen, on dead Podocarpus spicata, River Tukituki. 
3605. Lichen, on bark of Podocarpus dacrydioides. 
3606. Fungus, post, field fence. 
3607. Black Lichen, post (Podocarpus Totara) Chapel-fence, Mission Station. 
3608. Green Ditto, on ditto; perhaps the tawny patches on the same is another species, common on posts &c. here; eating, as it were, its way in irregular patches. 
3609. Lichen on bark, living Edwardsia, River Waiohingaanga, Hawkes Bay. 
3610. Ditto		   	ditto
3611. Ditto  (Lecidea?)	   	ditto	
3612. Ditto		   	ditto
3613. Ditto		  ditto; elegant little species. 
3614. Ditto,		  	ditto. 
3615. Jungermannia, on Edwardsia, Riv. Waiohingaanga. 
3616. Lichen,		ditto,	 Ditto
3617. Jungermannia,	ditto,	 Ditto. 
3618. Curious Jungermannia-like plant, on ditto. 
3619. Lichen,		ditto
3620. Moss,		ditto. 
3621. Usnea, &c.,		ditto. 
3622. Lichen, on Pittosporum; same locality. 
3623. Jungermannia, on ditto, 	d–––––– 
3624. Jungermannia, on ditto,	 d–––––– 
3625. Elegant little Lichen, on ditto, d–––––– 
3626. Moss, dry pumice stone downs, Tarawera. 
3627. Jungermannia, on old tree, wood, Tarawera. 
3628. Fungus, on bark,		ditto. 
3629. Fungus, on Phormium, banks of Mohaka R. 
3630. Lichen, on dead branch, wood, Tarawera. 
3631. Fungus, on Podocarpus;	ditto. 
3632. Black Antennaria-like Fungus, living trees, ditto. 
3633. Green Lichen? on Ripogonum,	ditto. 
3634. Elegant Jungermannia, on Suttonia australis, Titiokura Forest. 
3635. Small Jungermannia? sides of Mohaka River. 
3636. Jungermannia,		ditto. 
3637. Alga, – dried-up pools, grassy plains, banks Mohaka R. 
3638. Curious Lichen, on Hedycaria bark, Titiokura Forest. 
3639. White Fungus? on ditto,	d–––––– 
3640. Small Moss, ground, Titiokura. 
3641. Lichens (two), dead branch, Titiokura Forest. 
3642. Small claret-colored Alga, on clayey rocks, Mohaka R. 
3643. White Fungus? Sides of Mohaka River. 
3644. Lichen, on sandstone, Summit of Titiokura. 
3645. Black Fungus, on Coprosma lucida, Mohaka R. 
3646. Marchantia, sides of Mohaka River. 
3647. Fungus, on dead branches, Mohaka River. 
3648. Cenomyce, ground, Titiokura. 
3649. Jungermannia, ground, among fern, banks of Waiohingaanga. 
3650. Small Fungus,	  ditto,		d–––––– 
3651. Lichen, dry downs, Tarawera. 
3652. Ditto,		on Edwardsia,	Tarawera. 
3653. Jungermannia on ground, side of river, at Tarawera. 
3654. A very elegant Lichen which, if new, will interest you much, on Podocarpus gracilis, (n. sp.) nr. Tarawera. 
3655. Thelotrema? on ditto; – perhaps a n. sp. – T. tenuis, W.C. 
3656. Delicate filmy Fungus, on bark, wood, Tarawera. 
3657. Usnea? on Podocarpus dacrydioides;   	ditto
3658. White Lichen, on Podocarpus,		ditto 
3659. Lichen, on dead branch, forest, Titiokura. 
3660. Jungermannia, on living trees. 	d–––––– 
3661. Ditto,	d–––––– 		d–––––– 
3662. Minute moss, ground, banks of Waiohingaanga R. –
3663. Ditto,	d––– 	d––– (both picked-up in rain.)
3664. Fungus, on Friesia racemosa, Titiokura. 
3665. Lichen, on dead branch		Ditto. 
3666. Ditto,	d––– 	d–––; perhaps a var. of 3665. 
3667. Small Lichen, on bark,  	from ditto. 
3668. Delicate Lichen; only a fragment, crushed in my pocket; d–––––– 
3669. Lichen? on dead Melicytus, from d–––––– 
3670. Ditto, (green Sticta?) trees,	d–––––– 
3671. Ditto, (Lead-colored Sticta?) d–––––– 	d–––––– 
3672. Ditto, (lead-colored Cetraria) d–––––– 	d–––––– 
3673. Ditto, on bark of dead trees,	d–––––– 
3674. Jungermannia, &c., on bark, dead branch, Kaiwaka River. 
3675. Lichen, on bark, wood, Titiokura. 
  3675α. Jungermannia, on d–––––– 
3676. Lichen, on bark, forest. Titiokura. 
3677. Ditto,	d––––––  d–––––– 
3678. Ditto,	d––––––  d–––––– 
3679. Small Jungermannia, 	d–––––– 	d––––––)  Scraps
3680. Ditto	on ground,	d––––––)    ″
3681. Jungermannia, 	  d–––––– d–––––– 
3682. Small Moss,	  d–––––– d–––––– 
3683. Sphærophoron, on trees, forest, nr. Tarawera. 
3684. Ditto,		 d–––––– d–––––– 
3685. Ditto,		 d–––––– d–––––– 
3686. Lichen on bark	 d–––––– d––––––
  3686α. Frondose Jungermannia, on d–––––– d––––––
3687. Lichen, on bark, from ditto,		d––––––
  3687α. Jungermannia,	 d–––––– d––––––
3688. Lichen &c Moss	 d–––––– d–––––– 
3689. Large Lichen, trunks of trees,		d–––––– 
3690. Scrap of a Sticta?	 d–––––– d–––––– 
3691. Ditto,		 d–––––– d–––––– 
3692. Fungus, on dead leaf of Hedycaria,	d–––––– 
3693. Ditto, on dead stalk of Pteris esculenta, Waiohingaanga. 
3694. Black Fungus, on a Lichen, &c., – from nr. Tarawera. 
3695. Scrap of a Lichen. 
3696. Small stipitate Fungus, bark of trees, nr. Tarawera. 
3697. Alga –? nr. Titiokura. 
3698. Lichen, on conglomerate; dry ridge, Wahieanoa, H. Bay. 
3699. Fungus? on stalk of pumpkin, Petani, H. Bay. 
3700. Conferva? Waiohingaanga R. 
3701. Usnea, on Podocarpus dacrydioides, Ditto. 
3702. Lagenophora, on a log. Titiokura. 
3703. Scarlet Lichen, on dead Leptospermum, downs, Mohaka R. 
3704. Black ditto, on 	d–––––– 	d–––––– 
3705. Minute black Lichen, on ditto, from ditto. 
3706. Cream-colored Lichen, on d–––––– d–––––– 
3707. Brown ditto,	      	d–––––– d–––––– 
3708. Elegant Parmelia, 	d–––––– d–––––– 
3709. Lichen (Thelotrema)?	d–––––– d–––––– 
3710. Small Fungus, on	d–––––– d–––––– 
3711. Elegant lead-colored Lichen, on Plagianthus divaricatus, Ahuriri. 
3712. Alga (Codium?) spring, nr. Titiokura. 
3713. Alga, slimy sp., Waiohingaanga River. 
3714. Black verrucose Fungus, on Ripogonum; Titiokura. 
3715. Black Fungus, on		d–––––– from ditto. 
3716. Jungermannia, on bark,		d–––––– 
3717. Thelotrema,  		d–––––– 	d–––––– 
3718. Ditto?	   	d–––––– 	d–––––– 
3719. Prickly-growing alga, Rimuroa rivulet, nr. Waiohingaanga R., – some of the masses would weigh 20 pounds!
3720. Black Fungus on Hedycaria, from Te Apiti, E. Coast, nearly opposite Bare Island. 
3721. Ditto, on Corynocarpus, from d–––––– 
3722. A curious plant, having minute globular bodies on top of fronds: on Rubus australis, Te Apiti. 
3723. Fungus, on bark of dead Corynocarpus, – Porangahau, nr. Cape Turnagain. 
3724. Jungermannia, on 	d–––––– 		d–––––– 
3725. Lichen, on Suttonia australis, Te Apiti. 
3726. Large black Fungus, on Friesia racemosa, d–––––– 
3727. Bell-shaped pendulous Fungus, on dead Corynocarpus, Te Apiti, with young ditto, under outer bark. 
3728. Minute Fungus? on foregoing specimen. 
3729. Black Fungus, on Friesia; Te Apiti. 
3730. Black dotted ditto, on Ripogonum; ditto: – similar to 3714. 
3731. White fungus on raceme of Knightia excelsa; from Te Apiti. 
3732. Fungus? on dead leaf of Corynocarpus;       ditto. 
3733. Ditto, on Typha; from Porangahau. 
3734. Ditto, on Phormium; from Te Waipukurau. 
3735. Alga, fresh-water stream, Te Waipukurau. 
3736. Jungermannia, on bark; from Eparaima (a village in the interior, 10 miles from Porangahau). 
3737. Ditto, growing with ditto. 
3738. Lichen (Thelotrema), on bark, from ditto. 
3739. Ditto, (Opegrapha) d–––––– d–––––– 
3740. Small Moss from ground, dry hill, 	d–––––– 
3741. Minute Jungermannia, on bark; 		d–––––– 
3742. Larger     Ditto with ditto; 	 	d–––––– 
3743. Lichen (Scyphophorus), growing with 3740. 
3744. Ditto, on bark, Eparaima. 
3745. Ditto, (Nephroma) on mosses & living trees; ditto. 
3746. Ditto, on Aralia crassifolia; near ditto. 
3747. Ditto, on bark, ditto. 
3748. Fungus, (Antennaria?) on Podocarpus bark; ditto. 
3749. Fungus, on Mosses, &c., living trees; ditto. 
3750. Lichen, on Pittosporum tenuifolium; ditto. 
3751. Ditto		d–––––– 	d–––––– 
3752. Ditto, on living trees;		ditto. 
3753. Ditto (Sticta), 	d–––––– 	d–––––– 
3754. Ditto, (Sticta), 	d–––––– 	d–––––– 
3755. A small black fungus, parasitical on 3754. 
3756. Sticta, from ditto. 
3757. Sundry minute Lichens? on back of Podocarpus dacrydioides, Mission Station. 
3758. Curious Fungus, on bark;  ditto. 
3759. Lichen on decaying wood; ditto. 
3760. Ditto on fence (Podocarpus dacrydioides), Station. 
3761. Dark-green Lichen, on same; ditto. 
3762. Alga, waterfall, E. Coast, nr Cape Turnagain. 
3763. Orange-colored Lichen, on a pebble, Mission Station. 
3764. Lichen, on a ditto; from ditto. 
3765. Sundries: – i.e. half of scraps. –
3766. Fungus, on branch; wood, Titiokura. –

_________________________

3767. Lomaria, from deep shaded woods, Tarawera. See nos: 356, 1028: possibly L. deltoides, (W.C. in Tasman. Journal;) – a large var. – but I have secured you a good specimen. 
3768. Helichrysum, from top of Titiokura – probably sent before. 
3769. Specimen of an Araliaceous? tree – already sent, (No. 125, in printed “Journal”.) but not in this state – woods, Tarawera. 
3770. Curious fungus, on leaves of a small shrub; woods near Tarawera: vide, No. 2435. 
3771. Long narrow leaved Melicytus lanceolatum from ditto; vide, Nos. 154, 359. 
3772. Plagianthus divaricatus, in fruit; low ground, Mission Station. 
3773. Gaultheria – a bushy shrub, from high hills, near Tangoio, Hawke’s Bay; height 3-4 feet: G. revoluta, W.C. – It may prove to be a var. only of G. antipoda. 
3774. Small Epilobium, sides of Waiohingaanga River. 
3775. Gaultheria, – high hills, near ditto. Shrub 2-3 feet. 
3776. Carmichælia, – a diffuse shrub, low lands nr. Station, height, 4-6 feet: perhaps already sent. C. neglecta, W.C. 
3777. Small Leptospermum, 1-3 feet: hills, with 3773. 
3778. Scrap of a shrub of straggling growth – 3-4 feet high, from banks of river Mohaka – no fl. nor fr. But compare with 745, – and No. 92, lot pr. Mr. Busby –
3779. Viola, sides of River Mohaka – often submerged. 
3780. Myrtus obcordata, in fruit; Tarawera: vide, 1657, or 1652. 
3781. Small Luzula, forest, heights, above River Mohaka. 
3782. Hymenophyllum – parasl. on fern trees, woods, Tarawera – possibly flabellatum, Labill. –
3783. Carex? road to Tarawera. 
3784. Drimys axillaris – var microphylla, W.C., small tree, 9-12 feet, forests, Titiokura, &c. 
3785. Leucopogon Fraserii – heights, Titiokura. vide. No. 617. 
3786. Ourisia, (scrap) – Mohaka River; doubtless, sent already. 
3787. Ranunculus, small sp., dry downs, Mohaka River; – compare with No. 2392 from same locality. 
3788. Podocarpus? – specimen of the foliage of 2 trees, growing in the forests near Tarawera – height 30-35 feet, diam. 10-12in., of elegant growth, branches low and sub-drooping, bark smooth. I have often passed them, looked up & sighed! No fl. nor fr. alas! But I most certainly have sent you a scrap of it before. P. elegans, W.C. The Natives say it is a young P. dacrydioides! which it is certainly not. –
[P. dacrydioides]
3789. ‘Еνρηκα  – at length I may joyfully say! For 6 years have I sought perfect specimens of this; and have now both m. & f. specimens for you. From wooded heights above R. Mohaka. – Pittosporum diœcum, W.C. – for fruit, see a parcel enclosed; & see also, Nos. 710, 768. One of the most elegant flowering trees of our forests. 
[P. eugenioides]
3790. Polypodium (Phymatodes) ligulatum, W.C., var. (?) of P. Billardieri, but a constant one, in dry Fagus woods, nr. Tarawera, & elsewhere. See, 1996, which may prove to be a sportive var. of this – perhaps, that name may better do for both – longistipa. 
[Polypodum billardieri]
3791. Drosera – growing with 3773: Vide, 1064, 1464. A species very near D. lunata, but raceme bracteate, & petioles of radical leaves very broad. It may prove to be identical with the Bay of Islands plant – first detected in 1834, and shewn to A. Cunningham in 1838 – of which I sent you, thence, specimens. Drosera collina, W.C. – This sp., contrary to all others known to me, is never found in a damp situation – but always on dry hard clayey ground, like the British species, it stains several sheets of paper through of a pink colour when drying. 
3792. A small Microtis; grassy plains, between Te Waipukurau and Eparaima villages. 
3793. A small Carex, ditto. 
[Carex colensoi]
3794. Fungus on leaves of Ranunculus, ditto. 
3795. A few flowers of a Composite plant, (No. 47 “Journal”, & No. 416 hence) which appear to me to differ from each other. (Gathered among other things, by my little daughter). 
3796. Carmichælia, – diffuse shrub, 6-8 feet, sides of rivers near Eparaima: compare with Nos. 209, 312, 428 – but, I think, distinct. – Flowers remarkably small. C. minimiflora, W.C. 
[C. flagelliformis]
3797. Orchideous – growing with 3792: perhaps 2 sp. ?
3798. Ranunculus – from watery places near Te Waipukurau village: evidently very near to R. macropus; but you (i.e. Dr Joseph), so strongly asserted that species not to be fistulous, that I consider it new. R. fistulosus W.C. – every part of it as fistulous as the leaf of an onion. 
3799. Rumex – from alluvial banks of rivers, woods; Eparaima and elsewhere. Rather scarce, and quite a keeper at home (rather a strange trait in this genus). I have never yet met with it in flower – it must flower late. I hope to send you better specimens by-and-bye. Some of its leaves are larger than these now sent, but always bearing the dimidiate char. R. dimidiatus. W.C. 
3800. Exharrhena, wood nr. Eparaima: vide, Nos. 1832, 1936. 
3801. Galium; edges of thickets, nr. Kohinurakau, H. Bay. 
3802. An elegant soft grass, growing with 3798. I was much pleased with this plant. 
3803. Pimelea, nr. virgata; shrub 1-2 feet; growing with 3800. Compare with 1758, and others. 
3804. Fungus, on leaves of Melicope ternata; woods, Te Apiti. 
  3804α. Ditto, on leaf of Hedycaria, from ditto. 
3805. Ranunculus, on sandy rocks, base of cliffs, nr Waimarama, 6m. S. of Cape Kidnapper – often washed by the sea. A species evidently near acaulis, but sometimes 2-flowered, vaginated leaves, &c., – comp. with 1908. R. littoralis, W.C. 
3806. Carex – only 1 specimen, from a sandy flat (Onepoto) near Cape Turnagain. 
3807. Luzula, from mountain thickets, Ruahine. L. excelsa? W.C. 
3808. Celmisia, a fine sp., from Castle Point. Doubtless sent before. 
3809. Grass, from cliffs, Parimahu – near Cape Turnagain. 
3810. Epilobium, a creeping spreading thick leaved sp., from same locality, growing in sandy spots. E. Rugulosum, W.C. 
[E. rugulosum]
3811. Epilobium, fine erect sp., from ditto. 
[E. billardierianum]
3812. Cyperaceæ? – a plant rooting among Spinifex sericeus; sandy shores E. Coast, abreast of Bare Island. 
[Carex pumila]
3813. Carex sandy flats nr. Porangahau; probably sent before. 
[Scirpus americanus]
3814. Small Juncus, from ditto. 
[Schœnus nitens]
3815. Spinifex sericeus; growing with 3812. 
3816. Fine grass, swampy flats, nr. Porangahau; new. 
[Deyeuxia quadriseta]
3817. Carex – from thickets nr. Te Apiti; much resembling No. 1042, but certainly distinct. 
[C. semi-forsteri]
3818. Grass, sandy slopes, Mataraua, nr. Cape Kidnapper. 
[Poa anceps]
3819. Ditto,	d–––––– 	d–––––– 
3820. Parsonsia heterophylla, woods generally: comp. with 1831. 
  3820α. Ditto, (?) stamens inserted: certainly distinct. 
3821. Parsonsia, – creeping low, on ground & over very low bushes, woods, Eparaima & elsewhere. If this should not prove to be a distinct species – it has certainly claims to rank as a constant variety. – P. ligulata. W.C. 
3822. Hypericum, – grassy plains nr the sea, Hawkes Bay. 
3823. Adiantum, thickets Te Apiti. 
3824. Ditto, small sp., or var., woods nr. Eparaima. A. exiguum var., W.C. – See, Nos. 181, 2046, &c. 
[A. affine]
3825. Cyperaceæ – edges of woods, with preceding. 
[Juncus pusillus]
3826. Epilobium, edges of woods, Te Apiti. – A large species, perhaps a var. only of E. pubens, Rich. 
3827. A little Umbelliferous plant (Pozoa, or Azorella,) – from under edges of large stones, hills, above cliffs, Pauanui, E. Coast. – Comp. with 1695, 1717, & 2027. 
3828. Grass, sandy shores, Waimarama, E. Coast. 
[Deyeuxia billardieri]
3829. Ditto,	d–––––– 	d–––––– 
3830. Entelea – which differs (judging from A. Cunningham’s descript.) from the Northern species – arborescent. A shrub 6-8 feet, nr. Cape Kidnapper. E. orbiculata? W.C. 
3831. A black Fungus on leaves of Pittosporum velutinum, W.C., from Te Waiohingaanga River. See, Nos. 344, 200. 
3832. Alga – fresh-water, small streams, road to Tarawera. 
3833. Jungermannia, adhering to large stones, in a hill stream nr. River Mohaka. 
3834. Ditto, ditto: a slightly serrulate species, allied to J. rhizobola; – J. stolonifera, W.C. 
3835. Alga, growing with preceding. 
3836. Frondose Jungermannia, – J. Hymenophyllum? – but I perceive a disposition to root, as it were, at the tips of some of the fronds. – Wood, nr. Tarawera. 
3837. Frondose Jungermannia, growing with 3836; – a very peculiar species – only 2 specimens found in fruit. J. ulvoides, W.C. Growing with former No. on earth & damp stones, sides of a watercourse – compare with 669. 
3838. Small Jungermannia, trees, thickets, road to Tarawera. 
3839. Ditto   	d–––––– 	d–––––– 
3840. Lichen & Jungermannia,   d–––––– 
3841. Ditto,	d–––––– 	d–––––– 
3842. Ditto,	d–––––– 	d–––––– 
3843. Sphærophoron,		d–––––– 
3844. Alectryon excelsum? (var. serratum, W.C.) – from Te Apiti: this is the common state of this plant in this locality; – whether it is specifically different from the Northern one I leave for you to determine. You describe that species as having foliolis integessimis, &c. I did not believe, when I gathered it, it would prove distinct, or even a variety, – hence my specimens are rather poor. 
3845. Cercodia – from Station: probably sent before. 
3846. Polypodium pustulatum? (var. fragrans, W.C.) – sent before, see No. 2004, from woods, Te Apiti. 
3847. Elæocarpus Hinau,		d–––––– 	d–––––– 
3848. Pittosporum velutinum, W.C. – specimen with young fruit. Vide, Nos. 344, 206, &c., & ripe fruit now sent. 
3849. Lobelia – near to, but, I think, distinct from, L. alata; shady spots, nr. Mission Station. Vide, 1978. 
3850. Grass, dry banks, nr. Mission Station. 
  3850α. Carmichælia, from plains nr. Mission Station – Shrub, 5-7 feet high, – probably sent already, but these are good flowg. specimens. Comp. with 1043. 
  3850β. Scraps: – of a Mniarum? dry downs nr. Mohaka; – of a little Cyperaceous? plant; and a Fungus (Agaricus?) on rotten wood, Mission Station. –
Algæ
¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬–––––––––––––––––––––––
3851. Small green Conferva-like Alga, brackish water, Waitangi R. 
  3851α. Small green broad-fronded ditto, d––––––  d––––––  on stones, roots of Carex, &c. 
3852. Alga, on ditto,	ditto, from ditto. 
3853. Ditto, muddy creeks, Waitangi R. 
3854. Ditto, on stones, Waitangi River. 
3855. Ditto,	ditto,	d–––––– 	 
3856. Ditto, from mouth of Waiohingaanga R. 
3857. Ditto, from Ahuriri. 
3858. Elegant reddish Alga, dredged up from 2 fath. water, Ahuriri. 
3859. Handsome red 	Ditto,	d–––––– 	d–––––– 
3860. Alga, 			d–––––– 	d–––––– 
3861. Greenish filiform Alga, inner harbour, Ahuriri. 
3862. Scrap small Nitophyllum-like Alga, d–––––– d––––
3863. Alga, tidal rocks, Parimahu. 
3864. Ditto,	d–––––– 	d–––––– 
3865. Green Alga, rocks, low water mark, at Onepoto, nr. Parimaha – at last detected growing! – grows in dense beds, –. 
3866. Ditto, growing with preceding; a beautiful object when fresh. 
3867. Small Nitophyllum? same rocks, in vents, under other Alga. 
3868. Red Alga, same neighbourhood. 
3869. Sundry Plocamia?	ditto. 
3870. Alga; beach at Parimahu. 
3871. Rhodomela? tidal rocks,  ditto. 
3872. Alga,	d–––––– 	d–––––– 
3873. Ditto,	d–––––– 	d–––––– 
3874. Ditto,	d–––––– 	d–––––– 
3875. Ditto,	d–––––– 	d–––––– 
3876. Ditto,	d–––––– 	d–––––– 
3877. Small brown Alga, tidal rocks, Parimahu. 
3878. Minute filiform ditto, d–––––– d–––––– 
3879. A curious (and anything but handsome) Alga, from ditto. When fresh, it looks for all the world, like a piece of an old worn and dirty “swab”! 
3880. Small Alga, from ditto. 
3881. Ditto,	d–––––– 	 
3882. Ditto,	d–––––– 
3883. Ditto,	d–––––– 
3884. Ditto,	d–––––– 
3885. Ditto, on Corallina, from d–––––– 
3886. Ditto,	d––––––     d–––––– 
3887. Small red Nitophyllum-like Alga, on d–––  from d–––
3888. Small Alga, parasitical on Sargassum. 
3889. Ditto,	d–––––– 	d–––––– 
3890. Ditto,	d–––––– 	d–––––– 
3891. Ditto,	d–––––– 	d–––––– 
3892. Large Green Alga, rocks, Parimahu (gathered sp.)
3893. Alga, of densely cæspitose growth, in beds – & of a bright emerald green, – rocks, low water mark, Onepoto, nr. Parimahu. 
3894. Polysiphonia? parasitical on Sargassum. 
3895. A small parasitical scrap, on leaf of Ditto. to you only. 
3896. Polysiphonia? parasitical on Sargassum plumosum. 
3897. Ditto?	(beach- sp.). 
3898. Ditto?  tidal rocks, Parimahu. 
3899. Ditto,	  d–––––– 
3900. Ditto,	  d–––––– 	 
3901. Sundry small d–––––– d–––––– 
3902. Polysiphonia	d–––––– 
3903. Ditto?		d–––––– 
3904. Sundries; deep pools, tidal rocks, Parimahu, the common state of Alga there. 
3905. Alga, tidal rocks, Parimahu – vide, 3165, 3396. 
3906. Lomaria, 		d–––––– 
3907. Sundry scrap Gelidiums – parasites thereon; d–––––– 
3908. Alga, from d–––––– 
3909. Ditto, 	d–––––– 
3910. Corallina?	d–––––– 
3911. Sundry scraps,	d–––––– 
3912. Alga, beach specimen, Ahuriri. 
3913. Ditto,	d––––––  d–––––– 
3914. Ditto, 	d––––––  d–––––– 
3915. Ditto, on tidal rocks, Ahuriri harbour. 
3916. Ditto, light brown amorphous, beach sp., d–––––– 
3917. Ditto, green, inner harbour, Ahuriri. 
3918. Ditto, (Codium-like) fresh-water lagoon, Tangoio, H. Bay. 
3919. Ditto, Small parasitical, (2 species?) H. Bay. 
3920. Ditto?? very curious, H. Bay. 
3921. Ditto – H. Bay. Grows to a large size in Port Nicholson Harbour, but very difficult to dry. -
3922. Finely cut Blossevillea. H. Bay. 
3923. Sundries – H. Bay. 
____________________________
3924. A lump of a fragrant black resinous substance, but whether vegetable or mineral, I cannot now decide, it is invariably found on the seashore, where it is thrown in large lumps – though, on the whole, it is scarce. The Natives prize it much; they chew it incessantly when they can get it; they call it – Mimiha. At one time I thought it might prove to be the gum-resin of the Dammara, acted upon by the salt-water. – It may be a kind of Bitumen. 
3925. A bundle of fibres from the large roots of the Cordyline australis; – those roots the Natives dig up and bake and boil in scarce seasons, and gain therefrom a very sweet and somewhat pulpy mess. These fibres are from roots which have been so used. –
3926. In acid: 2 (?) species of Ileodictyon. – I do not recollect sending you any specimens of this curious & interesting Fungus from the Bay of Islands. – It is, however, rather common there; – on the edges of forests and in damp thickets in the shady ravines about the Bay. I have (during my long residence in those parts) gathered several specimens, but they always stunk so insufferably & dried so hideously, that, I believe, I threw them all away! I now send you specimens of what I think are 2 species. The narrow-ribbed one may prove to be identical with the Bay of Islands species (which, however, I had always supposed to be a Clathrus,) – the wide-ribbed one is, I think, new, and is, when fresh, a truly handsome Fungus, reminding me forcibly of a widow’s white muslin mourning-cap – i.e. of the thick corrugated plaited folds of the same. The expanded Fungi, when fresh, are covered with a horribly foetid sub-slimy substance of a light amber color (similar to what is found upon the Aseroë), which it is difficult to remove. I cleaned them as carefully as possible under water with a large camel’s hair pencil, notwithstanding they got broken a little. The valvæ & the unexpanded ones broke up after they were put into the Dil. py. Acid, in which they have also lost their white color (niveus) and crispness. They are (or rather, were – a very great No. of the veg. productions of this Country were devoured in former times by the Natives; mainly, I believe, through want.) eaten by the Natives – i.e. in their very young state. They call them, “Paru watitiri” – i.e. Thunder-dirt!. I have named the broad-ribbed species laticosta. – From fern-brakes nr. Mission Station. Ileodictyon laticosta W.C. In same bottle, some Red Fungi, comp. with No. 2808. 
3927. In spirits: 1. Aseroё, unexpanded, from same place as No. 3556, & gathered at same time; these have greatly shrunk in bulk since they were put into the spirit. 2. Cyrtostylis macrophylla, W.C., from banks of River Maraekaha); – (see No. 1944,) unfortunately these are rather too young, as those (No. 1944) formerly sent were too old! I am gratified, however, in finding them in a 2nd locality, some 50 miles or so, from the former. 3. Fruit of large eatable Gaultheria (No. 984) – these, too, have greatly shrunk. 4. Some Thelymitra flowers; doubtless identical with some of those dried ones already sent. 
3928. Oil of Alectryon excelsum? var. serratum, No. 3844. The oil is extracted from the hard woody seed, thus: – the seeds are collected into a peculiar long pouch, made of the leaves of the Phormium, in which, after having been softened by baking & steaming in the Native ovens, they are well beaten, & the long pouch is twisted & the oil drops. This which I now send, has stood 12 months to purify. – By-the bye, the Native manner of extracting this oil, is no bad illus. of the “beaten oil” of the ancient Israelites. 
3929. A bottle of Sundries, not vegetable – which you may give to whom you will – only let me know the names &c of the animals. It contains: –
1.	 a peculiar white fresh-water eel, very rare, of which the Natives have a superstitious dread; – they call it horè. –
2.	 2 Land slugs (Limax?)
3.	 A small fish (Clupea?) salt water. 
4.	 A ditto, curiously shaped & spotted; – 	d–––––– 
5.	 2 Prawns?		 – 	d––––––. 
6.	  large hairy-legged Hermit Crab; –    	d–––––– 
7.	 A peculiar Mollusk – Aphrodita? sp. 	d–––––– A. australis, W.C. 
8.	 A long-beaked Sea Leech, (Sipunculus? sp.) d––– 
9.	 a branched Zoophyte, ——————	d–––––– 
10.	d––––––  	d–––––– 		d–––––– 
11.	A large Insect (Oniscus? sp.) – shores. –
12.	A Myriopoda? – sand, nr. Bare Island –
3930. In solution, No. II: 2 rats, and a Bat, for Prof. Owen. Also, a parcel, contg. 4 Bat skins, for him. 
3931. In a strong solution: – Some Lampreys? taken here in the mouths of rivers in the spring – Native name “Korokoro”. A small Garfish – some small fresh water fish, and a curious crab from Cape Kidnapper. 
3932. A hank of Cord – spun by hand (in former days) upon the bare thigh – a slow & painful labour. Phormium. 
3933. A fine (& to them), valuable garment, made of the fibres of the leaves of my fine Cordyline (No. 1508). – C. utilis. These are only made by the Mountain Tribes; are everlasting, greatly prized, & realize a high price. It is called a Toï  [To-ee, pronc.] It may do for your Museum? The black dye is from the bark of the large-leaved Fagus; probably, T. robusta, (2478), or T. fusca.–
3934. A Mat made of the leaves of the Kie-kie (Freycineta Banksii). 
3935. A mat made of the leaves of Phormium tenax; both these are used by Chiefs for sitting and sleeping on, generally the latter. They call them (here) Tienga; and (in the North) Takapau. 
3936. An ornamental basket made of the leaves of Phormium tenax; these are only used by Chiefs, and by them only occasionally – to carry their clothes, &c in. They are now getting very scarce. Native name a kete. 
3937. A small loaf! Made of the Pollen of Typha – It is not a good one, the season being too far advanced. They are considered choice morsels by the Natives; when fresh, (i.e. newly baked) it has a very nice smell, resembling gingerbread! – I feel assured, that this Typha is not T. angustifolia, – at least, it does not accord with your descriptn. (B. Flora), nor with that of Kunth (En. plant., iii) – It is now a long while since I suspected as much, even from A. Cunningham’s last visit. I have specimens drying for you, which I shall soon send. – It is 10-12 feet high, leaves vaginant below, quite over-lapping, spike very large, with several small membranaceous bracteas, &c – roots edible. T. utilis, W.C. 
3938. A lot of Butterflies, Moths & sphinxes – all from my garden! Most of them, I fear, a little damaged. I should much like to know if they are new, and whether better specimens would be desirable. Their names, according to their numbers, would be a desideratum. Mostly caught and preserved (?) by my own children, &c Native School-girls. –
	No. 1 is a splendid fellow; Te Rangitauharuru of the Natives. 
      No. 29 is the perfect insect, the larvæ of which produces the curious Sphæria Robertsii. –
Finally closed,
  January 20/51								W. Colenso. 
  # 


24 November 1851
Waitangi Hawke’s Bay,
N. Zealand, Nov. 24, 1851
My dear Sir William,
Your exceedingly kind and most welcome letter of March 7 reached me here on the 9th. ulto. – and, I have just received and this day unpacked your case of Books (forwarded by Messrs. Reeve & Co.), containing among other works, the magnificent Victoria regia, and the 1st and 2nd Fasciculi of your Son’s Sikkim Rhododendrons. I have not however time to look through them, or, in fact, at anything just now, as our little coasting vessel returns immediately to Wellington and as it may be some time ere I shall again have an opportunity (which rarely occurs) of sending a letter to our post-town, I write you these few words in the midst of no small confusion. 
I cannot, however, tell how to thank you sufficiently for your many kind remembrances of me. – And now this long and unexpected and very kind letter of yours quite overwhelms me. It reminds me, my dear Sir William, of old times. I had waited and waited, and hoped and hoped, until, at last, (I confess) I almost forbore to hope any longer. From your excellent son, too, I had not heard for some years but he, I knew, was far away – Yet, though I could not divine the reason why you had suddenly ceased your warm and valuable correspondence, I still strove to do all I could for you and your son in the way of collecting. And now I feel (allow me to say) an inward satisfaction at never having flagged. Now, that I have again been blessed with such a letter from you – which tells me, too, how very fully your valuable time has been occupied, and what great things you have been enabled to accomplish, – and when you speak of your own physical sufferings; and of the illness and even death of some of the members of your family. Yet here you have, no doubt, been privileged in witnessing the contented humble bearing of a devoted Christian during sickness and her peaceful exit from a world of trouble and pain – and thus receive some alleviation during your own sufferings and grief, and a strengthening of hope, that the same Divine and All-Merciful Being will supply all your needs at that solemn hour. 
I sincerely hope and pray that this will find you and yours in health – which inestimable gift may God graciously vouchsafe to you all for many years to come,
You, also, cause me to rejoice in hearing of the very near approach of your dear Son to his paternal home. Doubtless you have had the unalloyed and reciprocal pleasure of seeing one another again. Perhaps he is even now at his promised work – the N.Z. Flora. Be sure to make my sincerest and best congratulations to him. 
I sent both you and Dr. Harvey a lot of plants in February last by “the Lord Wm. Bentinck”, and I also wrote Dr. Joseph a long letter in July; all which I hope have safely reached you. 
I am still collecting. but this you may reasonably suppose. – And I hope to add much yet to the Algæ and smaller Crypts. I have, also, a few new things among the phanerog. plants: of which I may just mention a very pretty and altogether unique Veronica, a small shrub having glaucescent serrated leaves, & flowering in the early spring! – a Ranunculus or two – another Exanthema, – ditto Myosotis, one or two, & some Orchideæ; and a Hymenophyllum, which has pleased me much, a species allied to H. Wilsoni, but very distinct, having 10-14 involucres; – &c., &c., – 
All I hope to send you by and bye but I cannot possibly do this till after the present busy season, as the whole of my summer time is fully occupied in travelling throughout an extensive parish larger than some of our English Counties and more difficult to visit its isolated villages and scattered tribes than to travel from John O’Groats to the Land’s End. – 
Be assured of this – that I am and (D. V.) shall he working con amore for you. 
Should your son have commenced his N.Z. Flora – tell him, to be sure not to close it until you get this present lot – which, if too late to be published in their proper places, can be added an appendix with the great advantage of being comprised in one index. 
In your letter you mention “Your ferns and some of your curious phanerogamous plants of N. Zealand are among the many engravings I have lately furnished” – from this I suppose you have some new serial publishing; as, in hastily glancing over your “Journal of Botany” I find nothing of the kind therein. 
I am happy indeed in hearing that your “Species Filicum” is again progressing – a great benefit this to the Botanical world. 
Pray excuse, my dear Sir William, these few hastily written lines, and believe me
Ever Most faithfully and affectionately
Yours
William Colenso. 
 # 


3 February 1852

Waitangi,
Cape Kidnapper,
New Zealand. 
February 3rd 1852. 

Dr. Jos. Hooker
Kew
       London. 

My dear Hooker,
I could scarcely credit the testimony of my own eyes, when on the 17th day of December 1851, I opened a letter dated “Kew, April 26/51” and read your never-to-be-forgotten name! I had but recently received a most kind and valuable letter from your honored father, which (not wishing to lose the opportunity) I had hurriedly and briefly answered, and, in which I had even expressed a hope of your being then engaged on your long-promised Flora N.Z. And now I cannot tell you how truly happy I am to find that you have actually commenced it. I have, at this moment, a line of some feeling old Scotch ditty running in my head, which being expressively suitable I venture to give you: – 
– “I’m downright dizzy with the thought”. 
But, my dear Doctor, I should have first re-echoed a joyful welcome to you, even from these Antipodean regions, on your again treading old English ground – and entering your paternal home – and seeing your parent’s and sister’s faces. Joys, alas! which the writer will, in all probability, never again know. – But I must quickly turn again from this theme, or I shall (as Shakespeare, I think, somewhere has it) become “as melancholy as a lugged bear, or a lover’s lute.”
Yes, and you tell me also of your good fortune among the Himalayas. Of this I had already heard; for, notwithstanding my being quite out of the way of hearing the news of the world, Fame’s loud trumpet has long ago brought your name to my door, and I often rejoice in spirit with you over all your many and interesting discoveries. And, when I sometimes stole an hour to con a page or two of the “Kew Garden Miscellany” (to say nothing of your magnificent Rhododendrons), I thought, what a very insignificant and comparatively worthless lot of New Zealand scraps I had collected during the long period of 12 years! I hesitate not to confess that I felt humbled at a sense of having done so little. – 
And then, you tell me of your (then) expectedly approaching Marriage with the daughter of your Father’s friend and fellow-laborer in the fair fields of Botanical Science. – This I had previously had an intimation of from Gunn, and this great and (I trust) happy event in your life has, I dare say ere this been realized. If so, allow me to offer you both my sincerest and warmest congratulations and to assure you that my best wishes and prayers are and shall be for your temporal and eternal welfare. – May you love one another: and saying this I can go no higher, for this comprehends all. – 
I once hoped (Yet, as I never measured my hope by a micrometer, I cannot tell you – as Ralfs does his Desmideæ – the exact thinness of my hopes,) – however, I once hoped that I might yet have the great pleasure of seeing you again in N. Zealand; this however, is now fled but not without leaving me a consolation – that you will not again roam in tropical or arctic regions. For, I think, (and I have now an extra reason for saying so, and, I daresay a most able advocate) that you should now leave collecting to others. Your life, your time, your store of Botanical lore, being much too valuable to be again exposed – and, the tide is ebbing. 
I am happy in knowing that you yet have a lot of our N.Z. scraps, and letters too, to acknowledge. I hope you may have found something among the last lot worth your notice, and that you will not be altogether disappointed with my long and venturesome (not to say tiresome) epistle of July last. – At least you will find these marks – that I had neither flagged, or forgotten you. – 
I do not however, relish your saying – “Our (N.Z.) Flora will occupy I calculate one thick volume with 100 plates” – pardon me this; and allow me to state my reason for it. When you published the Fl. Antarct., you repeatedly (on the covers of those parts) stated, that the Fl. Nov. Zeal. would be illustrated by 140 plates – and this at a period when you certainly had not anything like the number of genera and species (not to say curious and interesting things) which you have now. Again, I say, I shall hold 20 guineas at your service, for plates for our plants. Apropos – could you not put more into a plate? – i.e. of the smaller things – As a few of those of the Fl. Antarct. (such as Agrostis subulata &c.) have certainly room enough to grow. – In some plates however, you have put 3 or 4 species; this plan I greatly admire, the specific differences being much more easily recognizable. – But it is not for me to suggest to you. 
In your letter you speak of “species, whose numbers” you say, I greatly exaggerate in many instances – take Cardamine for instance: your firm belief is that I have but one species identical with your corymbosa, and that that, and all, are varieties of hirsuta” – Now in the first place (saying nothing of your having selected the most favourable genus on which to ground your remarks – in fact, I do not now recollect such another in these islands, unless it be Luzula or Galium.) – well, in the first place (I was go. to say) I am not aware of my having sent you all those many specimens of Cardamine as so many different species. Several I presumed to be merely varieties. But then, I did, and still do consider that we have more than one, and more than two species of that genus. Three, at least, (if not 4) I feel pretty confident will be considered as species: – i.e. l. debilis; 2 the little, wee one, which is very common here, and though growing in favourable situations is always minute; and 3, the large, dark, erect and perennial species; the 4th is the one with pilose siliquæ. Your further observation upon making all into one “by extensive examination of hundreds of specimens from all parts of the world,” I have already expressed my dissent from, in a former letter; perhaps however, neither philosophically or satisfactorily. 
I do not altogether think with you that our “Flora is a scanty one”. Undoubtedly it is anything but gorgeous and I believe, it will be found to be peculiarly local. Nearly all collectors (Bidwell and Dieffenbach excepted – although I fear the latter knew little and did less), from Forster downwards have trodden in each others steps – is it then to be wondered at that their collections have been so nearly uniform? No white man has tramped over more of N. Zealand ground then myself (I mean of the N. Island), and that too with open eyes; and I know that several plants are only to be found in one or two isolated spots throughout the whole Island. Hence I am of opinion that when the immense and dense forests of N. Zealand shall have been opened, and her morasses and glens explored, her Botany will shew itself to be of a proper magnitude, and bid fair to compete with the Botany of Islands of a similar size and parallel. 
I am happy however, in thinking how pleased you will be to get good specimens of the Caltha, (nos. 976 & 1578) which you, in your letter, speak of as being so interesting to you; – although I fear, they could not be in time for your publishing upon it. 
I cannot speak decidedly of any novelty since I wrote to Sir William in November last, save in crypts. – Yet, I know I have some good specimens of certain plants, which I had long been looking out for. And now I am getting all the fruits I can for you, and have splendid samples of Alectryon, Phormium, &c. in acid. I almost venture to think that we shall yet have a 3rd species of Phormium; two are as you know, quite certain. – It is a most plaguy thing to dry. 
I leave the Station in a few days, on another journey over the snowy range, when I hope to make a further addition. 
With my best regards and respects to Sir William, who, I hope, is quite well – 
Believe me,
My dear Dr. Hooker,
Yours ever affectionately,
William Colenso. 

P.S. You doubtless recollect that I ventured to request 2 copies of the N.Z. Flora, one of which was to be interleaved and bound at my expense: Now, as I shall not, I am very sure, have patience enough to await the completion of the work, before I see it, I will thank you to forward me, through my Agents, the parts of the copy for interleaving, as you may have opportunity. Perhaps you may have already commenced to do this. I have long been on the lookout for packages from my London Agents, which I now daily expect. 

 # 

31 January 1853

Waitangi, near
Cape Kidnapper,
N. Zealand. 
January 31, 1853

Sir W. J. Hooker K. H.,
&c. &c. &c. 
Kew, London. 

My dear Sir William,
I last wrote you on the 24th. Nov. /51 (in acknowledgment of your kind favours of the 7th. of March, then received, and the last from you, which, with my former letter to you, of Jany. 22/51, I hope you have safely received. 
I have now just brought to a close my long occupation of putting up specimens for you – begun some months ago – containing upwards of 2000 numbered lots; among which (especially the Orchideous plants, the smaller Crypt. and fresh-water Algæ) I hope you will find much that will both interest and be of service. I cannot now – pressed as I am for time – make any further remarks upon them, I have ventured to do so in a few places in my catalogue contained in Case No. l. I should have sent them off before had we any direct opportunity to England; which, however, only occurs here once a year – i.e. in February or March, – the annual wool ship. 
A fortnight ago an accident happened which had well-nigh fully prevented your ever seeing these specimens. My dwelling-house and adjoining premises were totally destroyed by fire, with very nearly everything contained therein – of Furniture or requisite kind – the accumulations of nearly 20 years Housekeeping – together with an infinity of stores – such as Tea, Coffee, Sugar, Wine, Rice, Arrowroot, Hams; pieces of shirting sheeting, calicos, prints etc. etc. – not generally kept in such large quantities in private families at home, my whole surgery with its contents! among which were all my wet natural specimens – Reptiles, Fish, Insects etc., the gatherings of years, – in acid & spirits, – a whole chest of splendid Moa bones, &c., &c., A 100 vols. of books, and (to mention the utile with the dulce) nearly all my carpenter’s and other Tools. – a complete & horrid burn out; through which my own private loss is considerably above £300. I lost, also, a great portion of my garden – including upwards of 200 fine 2 year old apple, pear and peach grafts – and all my alpine plants. 
My study – detached, most fortunately – (where, the specimens now about to be sent, with all others, and, above all, all your donations were) was twice on fire, and only saved, as by a miracle. Indeed it was deemed impossible to preserve it; and I, myself, had almost given it up for lost – quitting it with tears (having only time to carry out my desk, 2 boxes of Mss., and the Encyclop. Brittann.,) when God graciously heard our prayers & blessed our attempts; and, against all hope, the little building was preserved. Had this also been destroyed my loss would have been more than double what it now is – exclusive of the value of specimens. – 
I am now a much poorer man in every respect, than when I last wrote – but I have still a little roof over my head (which is better than none on these shores) and under which I must, at all events, make up my mind to pass the approaching winter. For, neither labour, nor timber, nor anything of that kind is just now to be had, in consequence of the exceeding high prices caused by the “gold digging” mania. 
It is now, I believe, certain, that gold is found near to Auckland – on the opposite shore of the Thames; but whether in sufficient quantities, to repay the eager adventurers is questionable. The very existence however of the coveted metal here in this country is, in my opinion, an immense obstacle to its real welfare. 
On tbe 16th instant (just a week after the fire) a letter from your son, dated as long ago as “April 29/52” came to hand. (I find however, that the London post mark is “June 16”). If the specimens now sent should prove to be of any service, I shall be glad that this last letter from your Son has been delayed; as, had it come earlier (before I had finished putting up) I should, I think, have hesitated at the propriety of troubling you with any more; and to this conclusion I should have been mainly drawn through Dr. Hooker’s own statement: – “I assure you that miscellaneous scraps such as you sent and all so carefully numbered are not worth the time and trouble of looking over”. And, again: “literally ¾ are seedling mosses & Hepaticæ, dead and decaying Lichens, bleached imperfect Seaweeds, mycelia of fungi, &c., &c., – do spare yourself the trouble and expense of collecting such things.” – And even now, did I not believe that there are some novelties among the lot, I would not send them. For, not to mention “the trouble and expense of collecting” &c., the expenses hence to Wellington (including Landing, Cellarage & re-shipping etc.) will be more than freightage thence to England with carriage to your door. I think my agents charged me more than £3 expenses on the last lot; and now, with all wages &c. are so much higher, I suppose this will be about the same. Of course, having troubled you with such trash, must be set down to my ignorance; or, perhaps more correctly, to both that and my over-zealous efforts not to leave anything – even the minutest – unknown to you. However, I shall not willingly offend again in this matter. If I had time (I may have yet) I would write a letter to Dr. Hooker in answer to his (who, however, I hope, has since received another letter of mine, of Feby. 3/52) but, please, my dear Sir William tell Dr. Hooker that I thank him greatly for his Letter; and, that, a former letter, mentioned by him as having been written by him to me, has never reached my hands. –   
In fact, I have not received any Serials – save Part II of “Nereis Australis” from Dr. Harvey – nor indeed any Botanical works (not even those I ordered from my London Agent) since I last wrote to you in November/51. I long ago expected to have seen a part of the N. Zealand flora – but that pleasure is yet to come. – 
I hope that these two cases will reach you in good order. I feel something more than usually anxious concerning them – and that, partly from my not having any suitable cases to pack the specimens in, nor timber wherewith to make any – having them so completely burnt out and no help at hand: but believe me (unfortunate though I am in all things) – I have done my best. I have not in this lot of marine Algæ made a division of them (as in the former one) between yourself and Dr. Harvey; as, I find, that that gentleman has that portion of the N.Z. Botany allotted to him, consequently all will pass through his hands; as well as from your being so much better able to do it – i.e. if they should be worth dividing. You will, therefore, be pleased to consider the specimens of Marine Algæ now sent as intended for you both. I hope you will find something of interest among the Corallineæ; if so, I hope to do a little more in that Family. – 
With kind and affectionate regards,
Ever consider me
My dear Sir William
Very faithfully yours
William Colenso. 


A Memorandum of Sundry Botanical Specimens,
collected and numbered for Sir W. J. Hooker, by W.C. 
––––––––––––––––

3939. Grass, low plains, Ahuriri, Hawke’s Bay. 
3940. Hydrocotyle, swamp, near Mission Station. 
3941.  ditto,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
3942. Geranium,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
3943. Grass, from near Cape Kidnapper. 
[Dichelachne crinita]
3944. Ditto,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
3945. Pimelea, sandy beaches near d–––––––––
3946. Cyperace.,    d–––––––––  d––––––––––
3947. Grass, low banks, nr. Cape Kidnapper. 
3948. ditto,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
3949. Ranunculus? common, in low spots. 
3950. Colobanthus? growing with 3947
3951. Myosotis? hills, edge of thickets, nr. Cape Kidnapper. 
3952. Oxalis, 	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
3953. Plantago,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
3954. Little Restiaceous? plant,   d–––––––––  d–––––––––
3955. Grass,	d–––––––––  d–––––––––– 
3956. Moss?  in watercourses, Waimarama, nr. d–––––––––  
3957. Pratia, low grounds,	     d–––––––––  d––––––––––
3958. Hydrocotyle?	 d–––––––––  d––––––––––	
3959. Carmichælia juncoides, fruiting sps. – plains, nr. Ahuriri. 
3960. Small Myriophyllum, watercourse,   d––––  d––––
3961. Rush.,		d–––––––––  d––––––––––
3962. Grass, from sides of River Tukituki. 
3963. Black Fungus on leaf, from Kohinurakau. 
3964. Moss? –––––––––  d––––––––––
3965. Grass  –––––––––  d––––––––––
3966. Chara? watercourse, nr R. Tukituki
3967. Moss? from watercourse  near the high hill Kahuraanake.
3968. Alga,          d–––––––––  d––––––––––
3969. Grasses, fungus on fruit, near d–––––––
3970. Juncæ. wet spots, foot of ditto. 
3971. Ditto, d–––, near Mission Station: stouter than preceding. 
[Cladium glomeratum]
3972. Suttonia, tree, 8-12 feet, ascent to Kohinurakau. 
3973. Aspidium, common, but pinnules more distant, ditto; see 40.
3974. Plagianthus, tree, 25 ft. sides of Tukituki River; small leaved specimen, young branch from same tree. 
3975. Water plant, in river, Waimarama. 
3976. Shrubby Epilobium, growing near 3967. 
[E. junceum var. cinereum]
3977. Juncæ wet spots, near ditto. 
3978. Ditto,         ditto, stouter & more erect growth. 
3979. Ditto,         ditto, smaller, spike shorter & denser. 
3980. Epilobium, with above. 
[E. junceum var. cinereum]
3981. Grass,       	ditto
3982. Carex	ditto
3983. Epilobium, d——
[E. billardierianum]
3984. ditto,	d–––––––––  
3985. ditto,	d–––––––––  
3986. Carex	d–––––––––  
3987. Large grass, glen, Waimarama. 
3988.  Ditto             ″   d–––––––––  
3989. Juncus, sides of Tukituki River, ascent to Kohinurakau. 
3990. Small Carex, plains, near R. Ngaruroro. 
3991. Large ditto?	   	d–––––––––
3992. Small Grass,	   	d–––––––––
3993. Small Microtis, 	d–––––––––
3994. Large Microtis, plains, near Ngaruroro. 
[M. porrifolia]
3995. Rumex,		d–––––––––  
3996. Large Hydrocotyle,	d–––––––––  
3997. Small Ophioglossum, 	d–––––––––  
3998. Small Epilobium, 	d–––––––––  
3999. Little water plant, in mud of river, Waimarama. 
4000. Large Myosotis, waterfall, glen, Waimarama. 
4001. Micromeria, plains, above, 	ditto. 
4002. Pteris, glen, waterfall, Waimarama. 
4003. ditto?	d–––––––––  d–––––––––. I have long wished to find you a good sp. of this fine fern: it grows in clumps. Some specimens are a foot larger. 
4004. Little Asplenium, dry rocks, further up, same glen. 
4005. Aspidium (velutinum?) dry shaded woods, ditto. 
4006. Small grass, plains above Waimarama. 
[Dichelachne crinita]
4007. Goniocarpus?   d–––––––––  
4008. Plantago, 	    d–––––––––  
4009. Pratia, fine, glen, nr. Waimarama. 
4010. Small grass, plains, ditto. 
[Sonia semiannularis]
4011. Grass, 	d–––––––––  d–––––––––. 
4012. Large Aspidium, common, ascent from glen, in dry woods. 
4013. Large Thelymitra, plains, above ditto. 
4014. Scrap of a Carex? from sand hills, Coast. 
4015. Pteris, (?) higher up in wood than 4002; but compare. 
4016. Small Hydrocotyle, plains, nr. Kahuraanake (hill). 
4017. Small Apium?  in a clear stream, ½ way up same hill. 
4018. Hydrocotyle, growing with 4009. 
4019. 5 specimens of Fagus from 5 different trees, all of large size, forests on R. Makororo. 
[F. solandri]
4020. Astelia, growing on stones, edges of woods, Head of R. Makororo; rarely in fl. A. saxosa, W.C. vide, (sp. in acid.) 
4021. Pittosporum, growing with 4019. –)
	    (perhaps P. didaecum, ante?)         )
4022. Fern, Dicksonia, forests, ascending Ruahine, nr. top. 
4023. d––– Alsophila?	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4024. Large Uncinia,	d–––––––––  . 
4025. Weinmannia, forests, nr. base of 	d––––––––– . 
  4025α. Fungus on fruit of ditto. 
4026. Large grass, ascent E. side of Ruahine range, nr. top. 
4027. Suttonia, tree, 12-15 feet, forests nr. base of d–––––: see, 412
4028. Coprosma, shrub, 5-8 feet, 	d–––––––––. 
4029. Pimelea, hills, nr. top, in open places. 
4030. Pennantia corymbosa?  tree 25 feet, sides of River Makororo: (see, also, fruit in acid.)
4031. Grass, sides of River Makororo. 
[Poa anceps]
4032. Rush – on plains, nr. ditto. 
[Cladium vauthiera]
4033. Composit., nr. R. Makororo. 
4034. Water plant, in    ditto. 
4035. Rush?   sides of R. Makororo. 
4036. Large Grass, woods, nr. top. 
4037. Euphrasia, sides of R. Makororo. 
4038. Small Fungus on leaves of Veronica, ditto. 
4039. (blank)
4040. Veronica, shrub, 7-9 feet, sides of R. Makororo. 
[V. parviflora]
4041. Large grass, near ditto. 
4042. Hoheria?   a lovely shrub, or small tree, 16-20 feet, sides of R. Makororo: unfortunately badly dried. 
4043. Small Carex, sides of ditto. 
4044. Composit. shrub, stout, 12-14 feet, ditto. 
[Olearia furfuracea]
4045. Grass, from open spots, nr. top of range. 
[Deyeuxia avenoides var. brachyantha]
4046. Veronica, from top, 4-5 feet high, shrubby. 
  4046α. ditto,      ditto,  perhaps a var. of precedg. 
4047. Orchid, Epiphyte, on roots & trunks of trees nr. top. 
  4047α.   Black Fungus on leaves of ditto. 
4048. Lagenophora, sides of R. Makororo. 
4049. Galium, sides of R. Makororo. 
4050. Small grass, (scarce),   ditto
4051. Aralia, tree 25 feet,      ditto
4052. Gleichenia, forests, nr. top of range. Compare with 1674 – G. venosa, proby. 
4053. Veronica, shrub, 3-4 feet, nr. top. 
4054.  ditto      d––––– d–––– d––––. (my only sp.) 
4055.  ditto      d––––   3 feet, d––––. 
4056. Grass, sides of R. Makororo. 
[Deyeuxia forsteri]
4057. Veronica, shrub nr. top 4-5 feet: a handsome sp. 
4058. Rush, sides of R. Makororo. 
4059. Astelia, several specimens, masc. et fæm., from Fagus forests, gathered during descent in rain, perhaps more than 1 species. 
4060. Veronica, shrub, 2-3 feet, nr. top. 
[V. laevis]
  4060α. Small black Fungus on leaves of ditto. 
4061. Veronica, 2-3 ft., nr top; perhaps identl. with 4060. 
4062. Veronica, a new sp., a bushy shrub, 1-2 feet high, on high stony ridge above the river Taruarau, between H. Bay & Taupo: see, No. 4265, for flowering specimens: V. glauca, W.C. 
4063. Uncinia, from plains, Taruarau: perhaps 2 sp. 
4064. Gaultheria, shrub, 4-5 feet, from hills near Taruarau: the long branch is a young one of the same. 
4065. Restiaceous plant, marshy grounds on high plains near ditto; from different spots: perhaps more than 1 sp. –
[Cladium glomeratum]
4066. Goniocarpus? from ditto. 
4067. Hypericum,        ditto. 
4068. Veronica, lovely shrub, 3-5 feet, from ditto. 
4069. Small Grass, high plains, Taruarau. 
[Carpha alpina]
4070. Gaultheria, red-berried; diffuse bush, 1-2 feet, ditto. 
4071. Restiaceous? plant, stony cliffs, sides of R. Tutaekuri
4072. Minute Cyperaceous plant, wet logs, Taruarau. 
4073. Small Gaultheria, 6-10 inches, plains, Taruarau. 
4074. Small Celmisia,	        Ditto. 
4075. Drosera, in bogs, high ground, nr. Te Kohurau. 
4076. Epacris?  top of hills, ditto. 
4077. Dracophyllum, 3-5 feet, ditto. 
4078. Cyperaceous? in boggy stream, top of same heights. 
4079. Small Goniocarpus?      d–––––––––  d–––––––––
4080. Composit., small, dry plains, near ditto: – if 2 species, then of the smaller one I got no perfect specimens. 
4081. Ranunculus, high plains, Taruarau; apparently scarce, only detected one, perfect specimen. 
4082. Leptospermum, small trees, tops of bleak clayey hills, above Kuripapango: 5-7 feet high. 
[L. ericoides]
4083. Small Grass, hills, near ditto. 
4084. Euphrasia, ditto, ditto. 
[This number occurs on ticket with following]
4085. Epilobium, an elegant bushy species, though low; sides of R. Taruarau. 
[E. melanocaulon]
4086. Veronica, a slender shrub, 2-3 feet high, of curious growth, completely filling all the watercourses on these high plains, after the manner of Typha, on the lower lands: V. rivularis, W.C. 
[V. salicifolia]
4087. Acæna, same dry plains. 
4088. Coriaria, spreading, diffuse plant, 2-3 feet high; distinct from C. Kingiana, same plains. 
4089. Leucopogon, hills, near Taruarau, larger than L. Fraserii – but see. 
4090. Pimelea, 1-2 feet, heights, near Taruarau. 
4091. Veronica, a truly lovely shrub, 4-5 feet, on those high plains; the flowers of this sp. stain paper a chocolate brown in drying, which passes quite through the paper: – allied to 4086: V. formosa., W.C. 
4092. Small Ranunculus, sides of boggy streams, Taruarau: only 3 specimens obtained. 
4093. Small Hydrocotyle? with precedg., scarce & not in fruit. 
4094. Minute Cyperaceous? plant, with ditto. 
4095. Cercodia, plains, near ditto. 
4096. Small Epilobium, sides of River, ditto. 
4097. Coprosma, 10-12 feet, forests near Patea; curious flowerlike excrescences on it. 
[C. cunninghamii]
4098. Coprosma, 8-10 feet, woods, nr. ditto. 
4099. Leptospermum, trees, 12-14 feet, high ground, nr. Te Kohurau: perhaps id. with 4082. 
[L. ericoides]
4100. Composit. shrub, 1-3 feet, dry plains, nr. ditto. 
4101. Gentian, from Puke Taramea, on open hill, half-way up Ruahine, E. side; see, 4166. 
4102. Acæna, from ditto, (scrap,) – more silky than common. 
4103. Lomaria, ditto. 
4104. Panax, ditto: perhaps P. simplex. 
[P. simplex]
4105. Panax, ditto: near precedg., larger; 6-8 feet. 
[P. simplex]
4106. Fruiting specimen of Carmichælia flagelliformis – (see 1577, from same locality as that no.)
4107. Coprosma, a brachiate shrub, or sm. tree, 8-10 feet, Fagus woods, Ruahine. 
4108. Veronica, – shrub, 2-3 feet, hills, E. side of Ruahine. 
4109. Euphrasia,		   ditto
4110. Fagus, large tree, ditto. 
[F. solandri]
4111. Loranthus, in fruit, (formerly sent in fl.,) parasl. on Fagus trees, Ruahine: see, 4201. 
4112. Hymenophyllum; a species which is entirely new to me, yet confusedly near to H. Wilsoni; yet, judging from descript. in Sp. Filicum, & from fig. in Newman’s work, quite distinct. Gathered in March, on a prostrate log in Fagus forest, halfway up Ruahine E. side, & only there. H. intermedium, W.C. 
4113. Small Gnaphalium? hills, base of Ruahine. 
4114. Small Calceolaria? fruiting sp. only, not yet detected in flower; see 1515, &c. 
4115. Microtis, another pretty species, sides of mountain streams, near Mokaipatea, E. side of Ruahine. Gathered in March, 1852. M. alpina, W.C. 
4116. Drosera, growing with preceding. And which I have ventured to name D. Cunninghamiæ, in mem. of R. Cunningham, who detected (I think) 2 species in N. Zealand. 
4117. Orchid, leaves only of a sp. resembling A. rivularis: ditto. 
4118. Small Hydrocotyle? densely matted, on ground:  ditto. 
4119. Vide specimens formerly sent. Hills, interior. 
4120. Suttonia, wood, descent from Patea, interior; small tree, 15-18 feet; comp. with 4027. 
4121. Cordyline, fruit of a very large sp. – hills, one which I measured was 20ft  in girth at base – nr Patea. 
4122. Clematis, fruit of, from ditto. 
4123. Jungermannia, side of watercourse; between Patea & River Rangitikei. 
4124. Ditto?                    with precedg. 
4125. Myrtus, small slender tree, 12 feet, descent to R. Makororo. 
4126. Dracophyllum,     ditto,   5-7 feet,     d–––––––––  . 
4127. Fungus on Coriaria, base of Ruahine, R. Makororo. 
4128. Ditto on Coprosma, R. Makororo. 
4129. Small Arthropodium, sides of R. Makororo. 
4130. Geophila?  from ditto: certainly differing from G. dichondræfolia. 
4131. Callixene, Fagus woods descending Ruahine: there is a diff. between this & parviflora, but whether beyond that of a var. is doubtful.   C. trinerve, W.C. 
4132. Lycopodium, bare hills, sub-alpine, near Mokaipatea. 
4133. Specimen of a small tree, 9 feet, (only met with twice,) Fagus forests, E. Side, Ruahine, ½ way up. The long branch without fruit is from the second. 
4134. Small Pimelea, 8-12 in. high, bare hills, near ditto. 
4135.   ditto      ditto
4136.   ditto      ditto, 1-1½ feet, Puke Taramea. (with 4101). 
4137. Orthoceras, high hills, nr. Te Kohurau. 
4138. Lycopodium, forests Ruahine – see, 4170. 
4139. Forstera, Fagus woods, alpine, nr. summit; from same locality as those formerly sent, & only detected in that one spot – 2 specimens only had 3 flowers on a stalk. 
4140. Grass, from summit of Ruahine. 
4141. Grass? from snow-runs, ditto: little mosses, &c., mixed with it. 
[Carpha alpina]
4142.   ditto             ditto	d––––––––– . 
4143. Orchid., (quite new to me,) from summit. Only 1 perfect specimen, & that past flowg., and 2 smaller single-leaved specimens detected, after long & anxious search, March/52: of which I send you 2. 
4144. Myosotis, also past flowg. raceme 6 inches, from ditto. 
4145. Dracophyllum, prostrate, spreading, from open hills, nr. top. 
4146. Carex? from snow runs, summit: little wee things among it. 
4147. Small Gnaphalium?  dry hills, E. side. 
4148. Veronica, shrub 2 feet, nr. top: (one small spn. only). 
4149. Pentachondra, growing with 4145. 
4150. Cheilanthes, from Fagus woods, E. side, nr. top. 
4151. Little Euphrasia-like plant, from open summits, top. 
4152. Small Grass, woods, near top. 
4153. Small creeping (Veronica), from open summits, top of range. 
  4153α. 	ditto,			ditto. 
4154. Pterostylis? ditto
[P. venosa]
4155. Small black Fungus on leaves of 4153α. 
4156. Umbellif. (Gingidium?) specimen with ripe fruit. nr. top. 
4157. Lagonophora, top. 
4158. Coriaria, near ditto,. 
4159. Lazula, long, slender, ditto. 
4160. Senecio? from top: rare. 
4161. Uncinia,   ditto; entrance of woods. 
4162. Isolepis?   snow-runs, top: comp. with 4146. 
  4162α.  Ditto?    (smaller)      ditto. 
4163. Scrap of a little alpine Viola, all I have: see, 4174. 
4164. Drosera, from snow-runs, top. 
4165. Small Grass, from top. 
4166. Gentian, from top; fine sp.: comp. with 4101. 
4167. Yellow Lichen, on trees & shrubs, top. 
4168. White   ditto,  on wet cliffs, R. Makororo: scarcely touchable. 
4169. Small Uncinia, nr top. 
4170. Mniarum,? ditto: finer leaved than coast species. 
4171. Edwardsia, tree 20-30 feet, from Matuku village, Patea mountain district, a very difficult matter to get a whole specimen – owing to the Parrots which tear the flowers to pieces to get at the honey. 
4172. Small Grammitis, on Fagus trees, hills; certainly distinct from G. australis, Br. 
4173. Ourisia, from banks of R. Te Waikamaka, E. side of Ruahine. 
4174. Viola, leafg. sp., from ditto; see, 4163
4175. Ranunculus, from the great plain Te Ruataniẁa, (bet. Ahuriri & Manawatu.)
4176. Gnaphalium, wet cliffs, R. Makororo; perhaps more than spn. 
4177.      Ditto            ditto,                    narrow leaved. 
4178. Lycopodium, Fagus forests, Ruahine; see, 4138 & 4255. 
[L. fastigiatum]
4179. Aspidium, woods, nr. R. Rangitikei. 
4180. Lazula, a fine species, from ditto. L. ciliata, W.C. 
4181. Leaves of an Araliaceous plant from Fagus forests; bought on account of the serpentine markings on them; which, after all, may be those of an insect!
4182. Carex, woods, Ruahine. 
4183. Gaultheria, hills, nr. ditto;  shrub, 3-4ft., not in fl. 
4184. Leucopogon, forests, descent to R. Makororo. 
4185. Podocarpus, trailing species, halfway down ditto. 
[Dacrydium laxifolium]
4186. Carex, ditto. 
[C. solandri]
4187. Melicytus, a species distinct, I think, from ramifloris, as you will find: see No. 4295, and, also, specimens formerly sent from other localities; – forests on R. Makororo.   M. bracteolatus. W.C. A diffuse tree, 20-25 feet. 
4188. Leaf of our Araliaceous plant, with fungi on it, woods, ditto. 
4189. Carex, woods, ditto. 
4190. Coprosma, common, woods, 10-12 feet, not lucida. 
4191. ditto, common also, woods, 12-15 feet; our largest leaved species, peduncles leafy: native name, “Manono”. C. grandifolia, W.C., to A. Cunningh. 
4192. ditto, also common, & near to lucida, in size & app. 
4193. ditto, a mountain forest species, vide, No. 120 from Waikare lake. 
4194. Small plant top of Ruahine (Cyperaceæ). 
4195. Dracophyllum, 3-4 feet, from nr. ditto. 
4196. Dichondra, small species, ground. 
4197. Hydrocotyle?  glabrous sp., from ditto. 
4198. Rubus, sides of R. Makororo. 
4199. Composit., sp. of an herbaceous plant, half grown, sides of R. Makororo. 
4200. Creeping Coprosma, hills, nr. ditto. 
4201. Loranthus, just to show its young leaves, which are really elegant (see, 4111). 
4202. Coprosma, 6-8 feet, of rigid habit, woods, Ruahine. 
4203. Small Luzula; ditto. 
4204. Fagus, a large tree, forests base of Ruahine; F. apiculata, W.C. 
4205. Coprosma, a diffuse shrub, 5-7 feet; forests ½ way up the Range; a sp. near to fœtidissima, being, however, not “subrotund”; specimens, masc. et fem: native name, “Kueo”. 
4206. Suttonia divaricata?  masc. et fem., same woods. 
4207. Lomaria, a species nr. to latifolia, (No. 284). W.C. I send you specimens of all its various barren fronds; the common appearance is that of the spn. having a root; i.e. with 5 pinnæ just up above the moss. From sub-alpine localities, forests, E. side of Ruahine range but I have certainly sent it before. L. montana, W.C. 
4208. Asplenium, a very pretty species, stony spots, Mokaipatea. A. trapeziforme. W.C. 
4209. Asplenium, with preceding. 
[A. flaccidum]
4210. Loranthus, forests, Ruahine. 
4211. Pittosporum: (vide, No. 4021.) 
[P. eugenioides]
4212. Olea, large tree, sides of R. Makororo. 
4213. Polypodium, wet sides of ditto. A sp. nr to P. grammitidis. 
4214. A ditto (P. caudatum, W.C.) growing, however, with preceding, of which it may be  only a var. & both of 
P. grammitidis. 
4215. Small creeping Veronica, with preceding. 
4216. Lomaria, a magnift. fern, from glens, Mokaipatea: see 429. 
4217. Sp. of a shrub from summit of Ruahine. 
4218. Creeping Lycopodium, from hills, nr. Mokaipatea. 
4219. Skinnera, from R. Makororo: anthers scarcely exserted. 
4220. Edwardsia, shrubs single branches in dry bed of Ngaruroro River; 6-8 feet. E. macrophylla, W.C. 
4221. Veronica, diffuse shrub, 2-3 ft., with foregoing. 
4222. Cyathodes, compact shrub, 2-3 ft., hills, near Maungarei: comp. with 4242. 
4223. Epacris, hills, interior: unexpanded. 
4224. Cardamine, large perennial wood species, damp woods, sides of R. Rangitikei: unfortunately, petals sadly eaten!
4225. Fungus, small, star-like, on Panax leaves, woods, interior. 
4226. Black Fungus, on leaves of Veronica, 	ditto. 
4227. Whitish ditto,    on ditto     infra. 
4228. Black Fungus, on leaves of Veronica,	ditto. 
4229. Aspidium, woods, interior. 
4230. White Oxalis, waterfall, streamlet, cliff side of R. Makororo. 
4231. Orchid., (Acianthus rivularis?)        with preceding. 
4232. Epilobium				ditto
4233. Little Galium,			ditto
4234. Small Adiantum, waterfall, nr. Te Kohurau. 
4235. Large ditto, from hills, nr. Patea. 
[Adiantum affine]
4236. Thelymitra? – a sp. with unexpanded flowers and very large & wide leaves. Hills, on River Ngururoro. See, a sp. in spirit. T. latifolia, W.C. 
4237. Shrubby Labiate plant, in fruit, from ditto. 
4238. Pittosporum, small tree, 12-15 feet, from ditto. 
4239. ditto, ditto, 18 feet; flowers smaller & sessile; from ditto. 
[P. tenuifolium]
4240. ditto, ditto, 12-15 feet, nr. P. tenuifolium; – ditto. 
[P. tenuifolium]
4241. Narrow leaved mountain Angelica; hills, interior: A. lucida, W.C. 
4242. Cyathodes, hills, interior: comp. with 4222. 
4243. Clematis, small sp., interior, banks of river Ngaruroro. 
[C. quadribracteolata]
4244. Pimelea, shrub, 2 feet, stony ridges, above R. Taruarau. 
4245. Adiantum, wet shaded spots, sides of streams. 
[A. affine]
4246. Pinnules of an arborescent Dicksonia, for comparison and examination, woods, interior. 
4247. Gaultheria,? with double calyx & both succulent & edible: a diffuse shrub, 1 foot high, prostrate; hills, Taruarau. See, a specimen in spirit. G. ?linearifolia, W.C. 
4248. Small grass, hills, interior. 
4249. Dracophyllum, ditto: shrub, 2-3 feet. 
4250. little creeping plant, Composit., growing densely matted on alluvial banks of watercourses, interior. 
4251. Large Clematis, banks of streams, nr. Maungarei. 
[C. indivisa]   [the number 4253 also occurs on a ticket with this]
4252. pinnules of a fern (Alsophila?), woods, Ruahine. 
4253. ditto of a ditto, (more deeply serrate, &c.,) ditto. 
[see 4251]
4254. Cardamine, long & wiry, swampy ground, Tukituki River. 
4255. Lycopodium, forests, Ruahine: see, 4178, &c. 
4256. Small Asplenium, crags, hills, interior. 
4257. Small Hymenophyllum, of densely cæspitose growth, on living trees, Paharakeke wood, near Patea. 
4258. Gunnera? from side of a stream, near ditto. 
4259. Drymaria?  dry hills, nr. do
  4259α.     –  a smaller var. of ditto, from do. 
4260. Melicytus?  woods, nr. Patea. 
4261. Ranunculus, from hills, ditto. 
4262. Fern (Polypodium sylvaticum), wet shady woods, ditto. 
4263. Fern (Aspidium,) & young frond, ditto: imperfect. 
4264. Sundry Fagi, from different trees, all large, sides of R. Makororo. 
[F. solandri]
4265. Veronica glauca, flowg. sp.: vide. 4062. 
4266. Large flowered Fagus, forests, interior; barren, but differing (I think) from any sp. I have yet seen. 
[F. fusca]
4267. Cyperaceæ, wet spots, high plains, interior. 
[Cladium glomeratum]
4268. ditto		ditto
[Schœnus tendo]
4269. Leptospermum, 8-10 feet, high hills, interior. 
[L. ericoides]
4270. Leptospermum, small shrubby tree, 4-6 ft., ditto: round leaves. 
4271. Ranunculus, plains, Te Ruataniẁa. 
[R. rivularis]
4272. Small Oxalis, ditto: see 4285. 
[O. corniculata var. ciliifera]
4273. Ophioglossum, ditto. 
[O. lusitanicum]
4274. Small Cyperaceous? plant, ditto. 
[Scirpus basilaris]
4275. Pterostylis, wet spots on banks of R. Ngaruroro. 
[P. graminea]
4276. Small water plant, boggy streams, interior. 
[Montia fontans]
4277. A ditto, sides of a watercourse, near the head of R. Tukituki. 
4278. Small orchideous plant, side of a mountain stream, heights above Kuripapango: scarce. 
[Corysanthes sp.]
4279. Orchid, from ditto. 
[Corysanthes rotundifolia]
4280. ditto, leaves only, wet shady spots near ditto; possibly same as 4278. 
[Corysanthes sp.]
4281. ditto, leaves only, among fern, road to Maungarei; some hundreds seen but only 1 in fl., which I send: see 4515. 
[Corysanthes sp.]
4282. Pterostylis, hills, interior. 
4283. Small Ranunculus, wet spots, Te Ruataniẁa plain. 
[R. rivularis]
4284. Ranunculus (1 specimen only; too early in the season, Oct.) from top of Ruahine, sunny side. 
4285. Small Oxalis, Ruataniẁa plain: see, 4272. 
4286. Portion of a frond of a fern (Nephrodium) for exn., woods, interior. 
4287. Little Asplenium, (only 1 sp.,)   	)  from dry spots,
4288. A ditto.                  (ditto). 	)  interior
4289. Aspidium, (all I have) compare with 4263. 
4290. Hymenophyllum flabellatum? stipes always copiously silky when living, a char. not noticed in Sp. Filicum. 
4291. Lomaria, edges of swamps, interior, nr L. procera. 
4292. Sundry scraps; all from my mountain journey. 
4293. Large Lomaria, sides of stream, Moeangiangi, H. Bay, perhaps L. gigantea, A. Cunn., comp. with 4216. 
4294. Polypodium  (Aspid.?) pennigerum, from ditto. 
4295. Melicytus bracteolatus, faem., & fruit, & a monster spn., in which petals are turned into leaves, as in No. 205, from ditto. 
4296. Marchantia, (?) elegant when fresh: from ditto. 
4297. Cyathea, arborescent, 12 feet; forests, Moeangiangi. 
4298. Carmichælia, a somber looking species, quite distinct from australis, yet, perhaps, one with minimiflora, 3796: shrub 6-9 feet, R. Moeangiangi. 
[C. juncea]
4299. Fungus on Microtis, from ditto. 
4300. Ditto, on Asplenium,	d–––––––––. 	
4301. Ditto, on Suttonia, d––––––––– . 
4302. Ditto, on yg. plant of Elæocarpus, d––––––––. 
4303. Little Hydrocotyle,? dry stony spots, hills, nr. ditto. 
4304. Composit., from ditto: comp. with 4250. 
4305. Senecio? much branched plant at base, 2-3 feet, from ditto. 
[Erechtites prenanthoides]
4306. Goniocarpus?  (burnt up by sun) plains nr. ditto. 
4307. Micromeria, 			d––––––––– . 
4308. Ophioglossum,		d––––––––– . 
4309. Arthropodium, stony spots, hills, above Aropauanui, H. Bay. 
4310. Viscum, on trees, Moeangiangi: see spn. in acid. 
4311. Ranunculus, clayey banks, nr. high water mark, ditto. 
4312. Lagenophora, among fern, hills, nr. ditto. 
4313. Epilobium, edges of woods, nr. ditto. 
4314. Arundo, (?) 3-4 feet, much smaller than A. australis, wet woods, nr. ditto. 
[A. fulvida]
4315. Epilobium, plains, nr. ditto. 
4316. Water plant, Lagoon, Tangoio, Hawke’s Bay. 
[Zannichellia palustris]
4317. Wahlenbergia, hills, nr. ditto. 
4318. Acianthus,   ditto,    ditto   (past flg.)
4319. Myosotis, edges of woods, ditto. 
[M. forsteri]
4320. Myriophyllum, Lagoon, Tangoio. 
  4320α.    alga  on ditto
4321. Hydrocotyle? thickets, nr. Tangoio. 
[H. elongata]
4322. Waterplant, watercourses, ditto. 
4323. Moss?  growing with preceding. 
4324. Cyperaceæ?  from near Tangoio. 
4325. Pimelea, prostrate, hills descending to Aropauanui. 
4326. Composit., dry hills, nr. ditto. 
4327. Fine Hydrocotyle? wet spots, ditto. 
[H. novæ-zealandiæ]
4328. Ranunculus, wet thickets,  ditto. 
4329. Pterostylis, shaded woods, hills, nr. ditto. 
4330. Celmisia, open land, hills, nr. ditto: possibly 2 sp., or var. 
4331. Large Compositæ, hills nr. Moeangiangi: vide, No. 46. 
[Senecio banksii]
4332. Flowering specimens of Alectryon serratum; see, 3844, for leafing specimens of ditto. 
4333. Cyperaceæ, gravelly shores, nr. Ahuriri. 
4334. Small grass, from ditto. 
  4334α.   Ditto,    from neighbourhood of Mission Station. 
4335. Mniarum, from nr. Ahuriri. 
4336. Elæocarpus, and, I believe, another new sp. It differs from E. Hinau, A.C., and, also, from E. sericeus, 1879; – coriaceus, 2485; – sinuatus, 1839; & – pokaka, 1837; but, compare it with laciniatus 2544, of which flowers (picked up) only sent. It differs from E. Hinau in the following particulars: – flowers smaller & greenish not white, petals 5-nerved, lobes laciniate acute, anthers not so unequally bilabiate nor pilose at top, calyx almost quite glabrous, not “patent,” sepals 3-nerved apiculate, pedicels less pilose, disk & leaves different. Tree, 25 feet, thickets, hills nr. Moeangiangi, Hawke’s Bay. E. viridulus, W.C. 
[E. dentatus]
4337. Knightia, a tree 30 feet or more, growing with preceding. Originally detected (leaf only) near Wangarei (Bream Bay), in the year 1840. The young leaves of this species are truly elegant. K. velutina, W.C. 
4338. Cyperaceæ ? dry clayey hills, above Tangoio. 
4339. Cyperaceæ, wood, Waipatiki, near ditto. 
[Carex vaccileus]
4340. ditto? edge of river Moeangiangi. 
[Cladium sinclairii]
4341. Small black Fungus on Lomaria, with preceding. 
4342.    ditto,  on Melicytus, 	d–––––––––. 
4343.    ditto,  on Aralia, –––––––––  d––––––––––. 
4344. Grass, from dells near ditto: vide 1157. 
[Asprella gracilis]
4345. Cyperaceæ? plains, nr. ditto. 
[Eleocharis acuta]
4346. Hydrocotyle? small glabrous, wet woods, nr. ditto. 
[H. Americana]
4347. Phormium (“Forsterianum” – “Colensoi” – “Cookii” –) from hills nr. Waikari Hawkes Bay. – See, sp. in acid; – in No. 5448: see also, note under No. 4537. 
[P. cookianum]
4348. Cheilanthes?  woods, nr. Aropauanui: Specimens in fruit gathered in Jan., those with fruit scarcely formed were gathered in November. 
4349. Cyperaceous plant, wet spots, hills above Tangoio. 
[Cladium vauthiera]
4350. Hydrocotyle? thickets, —————ditto. 
[H. moschata]
4351. Restiaceæ? ——ditto, —————ditto. 
[Gahnia pauciflora]
4352. Fungus on leaves of 4351. 
4353. Small Thelymitra, hills, ————ditto. 
[T. longifolia]
4354. Calystegia – a very pretty sp., pure white when fresh; very distinct from our Soldanella, & sepium, – unfortunately dried badly; from Moeangiangi. 
4355. Thelymitra, hills, ——————ditto
[T. longifolia]
4356. Skinnera, hills, nr. ditto. 
4357. Carex, woods, ditto. 
[C. lucida]
4358. Epilobium, (my only spn. & that not a very good one,); hills, nr. Moeangiangi. 
4359. Epilobium, hills, ditto. 
[E. junceum var. hirtigerum]
4360. Epilobium, same locality as 2 preceding. 
4361. Little Hydrocotyle? –––––––––  d––––––––. 
4362. Dodonæa, shores, near Ahuriri, young fruit: sent before. 
[D. viscosa]
4363. Libertia, woods, above Tangoio. 
[L. ixioides]
4364. Leptospermum, shrub 3-4 feet, open hills, ditto. 
[L. scoparium]
4365. Cyperaceæ? ditto: see, 4349. 
[Cladium vauthiera]
4366. Juncus, growing with 4362: roots gummy. 
[Scirpus nodosus]
4367. Water plant, from Lagoon Tangoio. 
4368. Orthoceras, open hills, above Tangoio. 
[O. strictum]  [See No. 4378]
4369. Lomaria, a sp. which has given me no small trouble, climbing high trees, thickets, Moeangiangi. – I believe, that all these fronds, diverse though they are, belong to one plant. 
4370. Leaves, of a sp  of Cordyline, which I have often seen, but never yet in flower or fruit. I have now 2 in my garden nearly 6 feet high, and I have seen some 8-9 feet high. It is very different from all the other N.Z. species: –  Native name “Tipara.”
4371. Cordyline, common here, tree, 20 feet or more; differing, I think, from C. australis, the common Bay of Islands species; the flowers of this are erect not drooping, & terminal not lateral. The old leaves get sadly torn with the winds, – the perfect ones sent are young & not full size. 
4372. Cordyline, from base of Ruahine, in thickets, and on edges of forests, a handsome sp., scarcely arborescent, 6-9 feet. 
4373. Hoheria, from thickets, Wairarapa, Palliser Bay. Small tree 12-16 feet; comp. with 4042. 
[H. populnea var. lanceolata]
4374. Laurus, and, I believe, a new sp. – Near, certainly, to L. Tawa, but that species is stated to have “racemis pilosiosculis terminalibus, &c.” – while this is decidedly glabris axillaribus &c: – the leaves also are different. From dense forest near Te Hawera, tree 40-60 feet. L, Cunninghamianus, W.C. (N.B. should you alter the name of L. Tawa back to Banks’ sp. – “salicifolia”; then, call this one L. Tawa.)
[Beilschmiedia tawa]
4375. Orchid, Epiphyte, trees, forests, nr. Te Hawera. 
4376. Fagus, – a leafing spn. only – a large tree, robust & tall, 60-80 feet, banks of R. Makakahi, forests, between Te Hawera & Wairarapa. A species differing, I think, from any I have yet detected; veins & margins of leaves red, which when fresh, give it a peculiar pleasing appearance. I am not quite sure that the young spn. belongs to it; it grew underneath with other seedlings, 2-5 feet high, and very thick, as thick as ever they could stick!    F. rubicundus,  W.C. 
4377. Lycopodium, a sp. near to laterale; from a bog, head of Wairarapa. 
[L. laterale]
4378. Chenopodium, on sandy weather beaches. 
[A specimen ticket bears this number: see 4368]
4379. Fruitg. sp. of a sp. of Composit., sent before, No. 116 from Wairarapa.
4380. Veronica, a pretty sp., 4-5 feet high; sea coast, nr. Pahawa. 
[V. salicifolia]
4381. Cyperaceæ? a glaucous sp., from sea coast, nr. Castle point. 
[Cladium junceum]
4382. Fruiting sp. of Alseuosmia, having black starry fungi on its leaves: woods, nr. Te Hawera. 
4383. Pinnæ of an arborescent Hemitelia, forests, nr. ditto. 
4384. Elegant Metrosideros; –––––––––  ditto,         ditto. 
4385. Carpodetus adpressa?  leafg. spn. only, from Patangata, another locality. 
4386. This curious alga-like Moss?  grows on but not rooting in the ground: wet low spots, dense forests near Te Hawera, where it is profuse. 
4387. Curious Chara-like plant, from bed or river, Patangata. 
4388. Little Juncus-like plant, mud banks, River Ngaruroro. 
[J. novæ-zealandiæ]
4389. Lichen (Usnea?) from Patangata. 
4390. Long leaved Galium, bog, Heretaunga. 
[G. tenuicaule]
4391. Curious prostrate plant, growing with 4387. 
[Scirpus sulcatus var. distigmatosa]
4392. Suttonia, same as 3972. 
[Myrsine urvillei]
4393. Glabrous Luzula? from wet spots, Herehere, nr. Ahuriri. 
[Juncus cæspiticius]
4394. Fungus on Veronica leaves, Patangata. 
4395.    ditto,  on Melicope, ditto,     ditto. 
4396. Slender Apium? from streams, nr. Patangata: comp. with 4017. 
[A. prostratum]
4397. Large glabrous Hydrocotyle? growing with 4391, rarely in fl. or ft. 
[H. novæ-zealandiæ]
4398. Fine Epilobium, 2-3 ft. high, bog, near Herehere. 
4399. Cyathea dealbata?  var. caudata, W.C. woods, Te Hawera. 
4400. Large grey Senecio? 3-4 ft. high, open downs, inland: scarce. 
4401. Small Oxalis, wood, Ngawakatatara. 
4402. Polygonum, dense bushes, sides of river, Patangata. 
4403. Grass, wood, Ngawakatatara. 
4404. Carex,    ditto,       ditto. 
4405. Orchis, (new,) dry spots, near top of the high hill Kahuraanake, H. Bay. This was to me a prize!  The color of the flower is much more of a true red than any other of the family known to me, – approaching to cinnabar. – see sp. in spirit. 
4406. Cyrtostylis macrophylla, sides of River Maraetotara, at base of above hill. 
4407. Grammitis, a pretty little species, growing on the sides of a pit near ditto: a small var. of G. ciliata, W.C., but for the first time, terrestrial. 
4408. Grass, bog, near Herehere. 
4409.  ditto     ditto     ditto
4410. Small Polygonum from plains, Kaokaoroa. 
4411. Small Myriophyllum, boggy watercourse, nr. Herehere. 
4412. Larger	ditto      from stream at Patangata. 
4413. Small Clematis,         near ditto. 
4414. Carex, shore, Waimaramara. 
4415. Scrap of a large Triglochin? growing with 4411; see, No. 4441. (detected, after my return home, among the other water plants.)
4416. Epilobium, 4-5 feet high, bog, near ditto. 
4417. Small Grass, plains, near ditto. 
4418. Hydrocotyle? stony ford, in stream nr. R. Tukituki. 
4419. Grass, country between Patea & Te Awarua. 
4420.  ditto, from Puke Taramea, ½ way up Ruahine. 
4421. Leafing spn. of a tree, thickets nr. Tangoio: perhaps, Hedycaria scabra. 
4422. Small Carex, growing in dense tufts, mud flats, near Station. 
[Scirpus basilaris]
4423. Small plant, growing with preceding. 
4424. Suttonia lanceolata, in flower & fruit; from Tangoio: vid. 2509. 
4425. Small grass, clayey bluffs & mud flats, nr. Ahuriri harbour, within influences of spray, &c; – a very local sp., peculiarly decumbent & patent. –
4426. Cyperaceæ? gravelly shores, nr. Ahuriri: see, 4449. 
4427. Carex,    ditto. 
4428. Little Polygonum,  ditto. 
4429. Chara, growing in beds in Tangoio lagoon, in 4-7 feet water. 
4430. A water plant, from Waitangi stream; flowers in long spiral peduncles. 
4431. Conferva?  on foregoing. 
4432. Water plant, forming dense grass-like beds, on mud in Waitangi R.
4433. 	ditto		ditto		ditto. 
[Zannichellia palustris]
4434. Potamogeton, Tangoio Lagoon. 
[P. cheesemanii]
4435. Chara, from stream nr. ditto. 
4436. Sundry water plants, Conferva, Myriophyllum, from ditto. 
4437. Rumex, growing with 4426; stains paper green in drying. 
[Rumex flexuosus]
4438.   ditto, from Tangoio. 
4439. Epilobium, a large leaved sp., plains, nr. Mission Station. 
4440. Hydrocotyle? from Petani, nr. Ahuriri. 
4441. Triglochin, from Mission Station. – vide 4415. 
[T. striatum]
4442. Grass,  near Tangoio. 
4443.  ditto,	d–––––––––. 
4444. Juncus	d–––––––––. 
4445. Hypericum, plains, nr. Station. 
[H. gramineum]
4446.     ditto               ditto. 
4447. Polygonum, shores, Ahuriri. 
4448. Epilobium,   from Station. 
4449. Cyperaceæ, from nr. Ahuriri.   See, 4426. 
4450. Bushy Epilobium, Station. 
[E. junceum var. cinereum]
4451. Cyperaceæ? from nr. Ahuriri. 
[Juncus maritimus var. australensis]
4452.  ditto  ? ditto: perhaps only a smaller var. of foregoing. 
4453. Hydrocotyle? from swampy spots near Station; when gathered I supposed I had “2 species”  (Ms. notes) in this lot. 
4454.   ditto?         from ditto. 
4455. Little Cyperaceous?  plant, muddy spots nr. Station. 
4456. Large Epilobium,  Station. 
4457. Micromeria, from ditto; leaves colored underneath, flowers large. 
4458. Little Geranium, from ditto. 
4459. Fungus on Suttonia, from Waipatiki. 
4460.    ditto,  on Alectryon,    ditto. 
4461. Asplenium, an interesting little sp., (or var. of A. flabelliforme,) from Wairarapa. A. varium, W.C. 
4462. Schizæa, from a bog, head of Wairarapa Valley. A little sp. (or var.,) very near to A. Cunningham’s. This is the first Schizæa I have detected in the S. parts of this island. S. palustris. W.C. 
4463. Suttonia, (undulata, probably;)  fæm., woods near Te Hawera): vide, 2510, &c. (See also 4481 for masc.)
4464. Small round leaved Polygonum, Wairarapa. 
4465. Pinnules only of a large sp. of Asplenium (not lucidum), woods, interior. 
4466. Hymenophyllum, strong scented caudate sp. or var., –––   ditto. 
4467. Fungus on leaf of Melicytus,  – ditto. 
4468.   ditto   on  d–––– Araliaceæ, – ditto. 
4469.   ditto   on  d–––– Metrosideros, – ditto –
4470. Leafing specimen of a Trophis? – deep woods, Pahiatua. 
4471. Black fungus on frond of Polypodium,  d––––––––. 
4472. Moss, glen nr. Tangoio. 
  4472α. Black fungus on ditto. 
4473. Fungus on leaf of Araliaceæ. 
4474. Little water plant from deep pools, Pahiatua, nr. Te Hawera. 
4475. Fungus on leaf of Astelia, woods, nr. ditto. 
4476. Lichen, on trees, forest, nr. Te Hawera. 
4477. ditto,         d–––––––––––––––––. 
4478. ditto,         d–––––––––––––––––. 
4479. Fungus on leaf of Brachyglottis,   ditto. 
4480. Jungermannia, 	                 ditto. 
4481. Suttonia (undulata, probably;)  masc., ditto: vide, Nos. 4463, & 2510.
4482. Jungermannia,		 ditto. 
4483. Moss,   ditto. 
4484. Jungermannia, on Aspidium, ditto. 
4485. Black Fungus on Asplenium bulbiferum, ditto. 
4486. Small filiform Carex, wet forests, nr Pahiatua. 
4487. Elegant green Hemitelia, forests, nr. Te Hawera. 
4488. Large Pteris, (near Pt. Brunoniana)    ditto. 
4489. Jungermannia,     ditto. 
4490.   ditto ?   (elegant!)   ditto. 
4491. Gleichenia, ditto: vide, Nos. 313, &c. 
[G. cunninghamii]
4492. Lycopodium, from Wairarapa: 2 kinds of leaves. 
[L. laterale]
4493. Larger ditto, from forest nr. Manawatu River. 
4494. Cyperaceæ? swamps, high plains, interior. 
[Scirpus lacustris]
4495. Juncus, beaches nr. Ahuriri. 
4496. Carex, wet gravely spots nr. ditto: distinct, I think, from the Bay of Islands plant, which is very much larger. 
[Mariscus ustulatus]
4497. Rumex, elegant olive colored leaves, alluvial grounds, H. Bay. 
4498. Fungus, on Cordyline, from Ngaawapurua, R. Manawatu. 
4499. Large Juncus, growing in water, Tangoio lagoon, 8-10 feet. 
4500. Lomaria, plentiful in a swamp, highland, immediate base of hill Kahuraanake. I believe this species grows in swamps at Paihia, Bay of Islands (& scarcely anywhere else that I now recollect,) & A. Cunningham, who examined it, stated it to be the true L. procera; but it is different from yours. It never grows large. 
4501. Arundo, (A. australis, proby.)  Waitangi Mission Station. 
4502. Sundry Hymenophylla – woods, interior. 
4503. Carex, from watercourse nr. Herehere: sent before I know, but I add this, to shew, that it is also found in pure fresh water, & away from the sea. 
4504. Doodia, from bluff, Ahuriri harbour., the only locality in the South where I have obtained a sp. of this peculiarily Northern genus; vide, No. 655 from same spot – certainly differing from both caudata & aspera, &, also, from Kunthiana. – D. latifolia, W.C. 
4505. Black fungus on Pittosporum from Ngawakatatara. 
4506.   ditto, on Veronica, – Kohinurakau. 
4507. Curious compressed fungus, on rotten log under the bark, thicket near Tangoio. 
4508. Elegant Lichen, trees, forests, interior, difficult to handle and preserve, very brittle, & rarely in fruit. 
4509. Cheilanthes – plains near Patangata. 
4510. Fungus on leaf. 
4511.  ditto   on ditto, under side. 
4512. Podocarpus ferruginea, forests, Ruahine. 
4513. Euphrasia, woods, very near top of ditto. 
4514. Yellow flowd. Composit,   ditto   ditto. 
4515. Orchis – hills, among fern, near Kuripapango: vide, 4281. 
4516.  ditto – hills, interior, 2 specimens; and 1 of a small Microtis having only 3 flowers on. 
4517. Small Cercodia?  ditto. 
4518. Fungus on leaves of Olea?     ditto. 
4519. Small Asplenium (conglomerate, rocks, high hills, interior; A. simplex, W.C. 
4520. Black fungus on Coprosma, (No. 4205,) forests, Ruahine. 
4521. Lichen (Usnea?)   woods,    ditto. 
4522. Scarce   ditto, of large growth but tender, trees, forests, nr. top of Ruahine. 
4523. Callixene trinerve,  (bis)   –––––––––––––––– ditto. 
4524. Myrtus, flowg. sp., same woods. 
4525. Curious little plant, under water, in a stream near Huaangarua. 
4526. Grammitis rufus-villosus, (again! after a long search) forests, nr. Te Hawera. 
4527. Jungermannia, in fruit, from several parts of same forests, a sp. near J. gigantea, or that sp. 
4528.   ditto,  in fruit, (elegantissime!)      ditto. 
4529.   ditto, pendant from trees,                ditto. 
4530. Fungus, on leaf,		      ditto. 
4531. Lomaria, perhaps discolor,               ditto. 
4532. Minute Hymenophyllum, trees, dry woods, head of Wairarapa. H. pusillum, W.C. 
4533. A dish of scraps – i.e. gleanings.
4534. Viola, from interior, Huiarau. 
4533(2nd). Phormium – the larger red flowered species, which is small, common, and generally believed to be the true Ph. tenax; Vide, sp. of its fibres (“flax”) No. 4533; and, also, of its flowers in acid, No. 5445. From swamps &c., near Mission Station, Hawke’s Bay – Native name, “Ẁaranui.”
4534(2nd) Phormium: the variegated var., very scarce; I have never seen it growing really wild, although almost every old village has a cultivated plant or two of it growing within its enclosures. Leaves irregularly striped from base to apex with cream-colored lines of various breadths, from 1/50 to ½ of an inch. Plant smaller than the foregoing, but larger than Ph., No. 4347, and very rarely flowering; at least I have seldom detected it in that state. Flowers, reddish, orange, & green, resembling in color & general appearance, those of No. 4347. I had a fine plant of it in my garden at Paihia, Bay of Islands, (which Dr Jos. Hooker saw.) but it never flowered. I have also, at present, a plant in my garden here, which is thriving but without flowers. It is, I believe, rarely or never used for its fibres (“flax”), which are said to be coarse. – specimen, in acid, No. 5447, from Petani, nr. Ahuriri. Native name, “Aoranga.”
4535. Phormium: a sp. (or var.) having dark-edged leaves, & much prized by the Natives for its long & fine fibre (“flax”), and for the easiness with which it is worked. – A stout & large plant, nearly equaling Ph. tenax (4533) in size. The plant, however, is generally more compact, and its leaves more erect than 4533, by which it may be distinguished even at a distance. On the upper sides of its long glossy leaves, from the apex to the base, is a claret colored border from ⅛ to ¼ of an inch in width. Ph. tenax, (4533) has a narrow bright red incrassated margin only. The species also grows wild in swamps & plains, and is cultivated by the Natives for the sake of its fibres (“flax”). Its flowers, in general appearance & color, resemble those of Ph. tenax. The specimens under this No. (including, also 5444,) are from old cultivated plants, growing at Waimarama, on the E. Coast. Vide, sp. of “flax”, No. 4536 and of flowers, in acid, No. 5444. Native name, “Tapoto”. 
   4535α. Phormium: – 3 specimens of pods with 2 tips of leaves, from plants resembling the foregoing, but past flowering, growing wild in a swamp near Herehere. 
4536. Phormium: two specimens of a curious instance of the perianth being changed into leaves; from the shores of Palliser Bay – This is, I believe, of very rare occurrence; I never having before noticed it; the Natives also express their surprise at it. There were, however, several scapes all more or less so, on the same plant. 
4537. Phormium: Sundry specimens, from different localities: – the pods from the top of a hill near Kohinurakau, which are perhaps, identical with No. 4347. 
	*** NOTE: The Phormium, No. 4347, (called, by the Natives, “Warariki”) though generally found on hilly spots, is sometimes met with in swampy places, and often on cliffs, & near the sea-shore. (I believe the 2 specimens, No. 4536, to belong to this sp.)  It is on the whole, quite as abundant here at the S. as the large red-flowered species; while at the N. it is very scarce. I had a plant of it in my garden at Paihia, (which I had carried thither from near Bream Bay on the E. Coast.) which flowered, and which Dr Jos. Hooker saw. The sp. of its fibres (“flax”) here with sent, No. 4347, is  a very inferior one from this neighbourhood. – Vide, sp. in acid, No. 3446, for what I believe to be a sporting variety of this species. I have before remarked upon the acuteness of the New Zealanders in distinguishing & naming (appropriately) species; (e.g. Dicksonia squarrosa et fibrosa, Tasm. Journal, vol. ii, p.181,) this is again shewn in their universal names for the 2 common species of Phormium, Nos. 4533 & 4347; the former of which is called, “Waranui”, – literally, broadwidth, and the latter, “Warariki”, narrow width – i.e., and botanically, latifolia & angustifolia. – The “flax” which is commonly manufactured & sold to the traders is of the large kind, P. tenax, 4533. All the specimens of “flax” now sent were scraped dry, and have never been wetted. (See my letter of Jany. 22/57, for further information relative to this genus.) 
–––––––––––––––

Cryptogamiæ. 
–––
4538. Marchantia, &c., cliffs of R. Otureawa, nr. Patea. 
4539.    ditto,           cliffs of R. Tutaekuri, nr. Ahuriri. 
4540. Lichen, conglomerate crags, ascent, Mangahare, nr. Patea. 
4541. Jungerm., ? on Fagus, Ruahine. 
4542. Lichen,   d–––––– d–––––. 
4543. ditto,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4544. Jungerm.,     d–––––––––  d––––––––. 
4545. Jungermannia, on Fagus, Ruahine. 
4546. Lichen,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4547. ditto,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4548. ditto,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4549. Moss, on rocks, R. Waikamaka,  E. base of Ruahine. 
4550. Jungermannia, on Alectryon, R. Tutaekuri. 
4550a. Grey Lichen,	ditto,	ditto	ditto. 
4551. Jungermannia,	ditto	d. 
4552.   ditto?     dry bed of watercourse near Te Umukiwi. 
4553. Lichen, on ground, high plains, interior. 
4554. Moss,     ditto   d–––––––––  d––––––––
4555. Lichen    ditto    d–––––––––  d––––––––
4556. Fungus on wheat culms, R. Tutaekuri. 
4557. Lichen, on conglomerate, heights, above Kuripapango. 
4558.  Ditto, on crags,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––. 
4559. Jungermannia, edge of watercourse, heights above R. Taruarau. 
4560. Sundry Lichens, (scraps), Fagus trees, Ruahine. 
4561. Lichen, on stones, R. Taruarau. 
4562.  Ditto, on trees, Ruahine. 
4563.  Ditto, on a dead branch, R. Makororo. 
4564.  ditto?	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4565. Lichens, on living Aralia,  d––––––––– . 
4566. a white stone having a black vegetating substance on it, from a stream (under water), heights above Kuripapango. 
4567. Grey Lichen, on bark, from forest nr. Patea. 
4568. Marchantia?  & Moss, shaded cliffs, Tutaekuri River. 
4569. 	Ditto	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4570. Fungus, on leaves, (Hedycaria,)  thickets,  ditto. 
4571. Lichen, (Stereocaulon) on stones, Ruahine. 
4572. Fungus, on Phormium, –––––––––  ditto. 
4573. Ditto, on wood, ––––––––––––––ditto. 
4574. Fungus, on rotten logs, Ruahine. 
4575. Jungermannia?   on trees, ditto. 
4576. Lichen?	d–––––––––  d–––––––––– 
4577. ditto,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4578. ditto,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4579. Jungermannia, d–––––––––  d–––––––––
4580. Lichen (Nephroma), d–––––––d––––––––
4581. Jungermannia, d–––––––––  d–––––––––
4582. Moss, &c.,     d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4583. Lichen,           d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4584. Black woody fungus, which gives out a black powder, in drying,
4585. Very elegant Moss, d––––––– d––––––––
4586. Moss,	 –––––––––  d––––––––––
4587. Jungermannia, d–––––––– d–––––––––
4588. ditto,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4589. ditto,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4590. ditto,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4591. ditto,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4592. ditto,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4593. ditto,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4594. ditto?	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4595. ditto?	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4596. ditto,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4597. ditto,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4598. Moss, &c., surface of bogs, high grounds, interior. 
4599. Lichen, on a stump, high hills, Patea. 
4600. Curious hair-like substance piercing dead leaves among debris, forests, E. base of Ruahine. 
4601. Jungermannia, on living Olea, high hills, Patea. 
4602. ditto,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4603. Jungermannia, on living Olea, high hills, Patea. 

______________________

	
Memo. I  had written thus far at 3 p.m. of the 8th of January 1853, in my little detached study at the end of my garden, when a disagreeable smell of something burning impelled me to drop my writing and go to the door. I saw a smoke proceeding from my dwelling house, towards which I immediately ran; I had, however, got but a few yards when I heard Mrs Colenso screaming, that the house was on fire, and less than another minute assured me that there was no hope!  In less than half-an-hour (owing to the very high W. wind which blew, & the great dryness of the materials) every thing was destroyed. We saved scarcely any thing, losing besides the premises (the dwelling-house, carpenter’s shop, barn, ricks of hay, &c, fences, & small outbuildings, & part of garden, containing many foreign trees & all my alpine plants) nearly all the property therein – the accumulations of nearly 20 years, which £300 would not fully replace. The study itself was twice on fire, and only with the greatest difficulty preserved: – I sighed, indeed when I left it, with all our specimens scarcely expecting it could be preserved. God, however, heard our imploring prayers. And, though I am a much poorer man than when I wrote the top line, of this page, I have still a little roof over my head and a little remaining fruit in the end of the garden. Since the fire, I have had a most severe attack of influenza from which I am not half recovered; but I hasten to finish & dispatch: –  January 13th 1853. W.C. 


4604. Fungus, on dead stump, high hills, Patea. 
4605. ditto?	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4606. ditto?	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4607. Fungus? on dead stump, high hills, Patea. 
4608. Black stipitate Fungus &c., d–––––– d––––––––
4609. Small pendulous ditto, d–––––––––  d–––––––––– 
4610. Lichen, on bark	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4611. Fungus, on stump, 	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4612. Jungermannia, on Olea, d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4613.    ditto, on bark, from a pole on Patea chapel roof. 
4614. Lichens, on Edwardsia, Patea. 
4615. Fungus on wheat culms,   ditto   (these were very fine when obtained, but since alas! devoured). 
4616. Jungermannia, on ground, heights, nr. Patea. 
4617. 2 small Lichens, on crags. –––––––––  ditto
4618. Fungus?  elegant sp., on a tree, forest, nr. ditto. 
4619. Elegant little Fungus, on rotten log. d––––––
4620. Minute vegetable, on Pumice, near Kuripapango. 
4621. Jungermannia, with ditto. 
4622. Lichen on living Edwardsia, Kuripapango. 
  4622α. Jungermannia, with ditto. 
4623. Lichen, on ground, Kuripapango. 
4624. Moss,      ditto,	ditto. 
4625. Lichen, on Fagus, hills above  ditto. 
4626. ditto,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4627. ditto,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4628. Jungermannia, &c.,            d––––––––––
4629. Lichen on Leptospermum, d–––––––––  
4630.  Ditto,  Ground, –––––––  d–––––––––
4631. Fungus on Leptospermum, d–––––––––  
4632. Black Fungus?  on old tree, d–––––––––  
4633. Vegetable substance on Mosses, bog, nr. ditto. 
4634. Moss, plains, road to Kuripapango. 
4635. Green moss-like clump, under droppings, crags, above ditto. 
4636. Jungermannia, on Fagus, heights above Kuripapango. 
4637. ditto,	      d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4638. Filiform Fungus, d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4639. Lichen,	      d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4640. ditto,	      d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4641.  ditto, on Leptospermum,        d–––––––  (see, 4629)
4642. Marchantia, ground, sides of R. Tutaekuri. 
4643. Jungermannia, between stones rising out of the water in bed of R. Ngaruroro at Kuripapango. 
4644. Small Jungermannia, craggy heights, nr. ditto. 
4645. Moss on Cordyline, ––––––––––––––nr. ditto. 
4646. Fungus on dead Edwardsia, –––	d––––––––
4647. Lichen on Edwardsia.      –––––   d––––––––
4648.  Ditto on Leptospermum    ––––	d––––––––
4649. Vegetable, on Melicytus, nr. R. Ngaruroro. 
4650.   Ditto, on Edwardsia,	     d––––––––––
4651. Moss, on ground, plains, nr   ditto
4652. Lichen, on pebbles,  ditto     ditto
4653. ditto,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4654. ditto, on crags,      above     ditto
4655. ditto,      ditto,             ditto. 
4656. Blue-black ditto, on earth between crags, with foregoing. 
4657. A few scraps, on ground, top of Maungarei. 
4658. Lichen on Podocarpus dacrydioides, forests, nr. Patea. 
4659. Jungermannia, on d–––––––––  d–––––– 
4660. Lichen,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4661. ditto,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4662. ditto,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4663. ditto,   on Cordyline	      d––––––––––
4664. Moss     on ditto	      d–––––––––– 
4665. ditto,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4666. Elegant Lichen, forests, nr. Patea. 
4667. Lichens	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4668. Jungermannia (perhaps 2 sp.), descent to Te Awarua. 
4669. Moss, on ground,               d––––––––––
4670. Lichen on stones, ––––––– d––––––––––
4671.  ditto, very elegant and larger, on living Podocarpus spicata, ditto. 
4672. Fungus in decaying Pod. spicata, Te Awarua. 
4673. Fungus on ground, nr. Te Awarua, (bis). 
4674. White Lichen on living Podocarpus spicata, ditto. 
4675. Jungermannia,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––. 
4676.   ditto		d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4677. Black Lichen		d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4678. Lichen on Pods. dacrydioides, 	      d––––––––––
4679. Jungermannia, sides of R. Tureawa, nr. Patea. 
4680.   ditto,     ground, descent to Te Awarua. 
4681.   ditto?		ditto. 
4682.   ditto		ditto. 
4683. Small ditto, on twig, from Te Awarua. 
4684.  ditto,       sides of watercourse, nr. ditto. 
4685. Anthoceros,		ditto	d–––––––––  
4686. Onoclea-like,	 	ditto	d–––––––––  
4687. Lichen (Peltifera)  among fern,	d–––––––––  
4688. Jungermannia, sides of water course, d––––––
4689. Marchantia, glen nr. Te Awarua. 
4690. Jungermannia, on Melicytus, nr. R. Ngaruroro. 
4691.   ditto, on rotten log, Fagus, forests, ½ way up Ruahine. 
4692. Moss, &c., from snow runs, top of ditto. 
4693. Alga, ground, ascent from R. Rangitikei. 
4694. Lichen, crags, summit of Ruahine. 
4695. Stones from the bed of a small stream on a woody glen, nr. base of Ruahine Ranges, red, with other substances spotted on it; the stones and pebbles which are wholly under water are entirely red. 
4696. Fungus on stump, Patea (bis.)
4697.  ditto, on Aralia, R. Makororo. 
4698. Vegetable, on a stone, high open hill above the R. Waikamaka: orange-red when living. 
4699. Lichen, on clay, R. Makororo. 
4700.   ditto, on Suttonia,      from nr. Mokaipatea. 
4701.   ditto, on trees, forests, Patea. 
4702. Fungus, on Fagus, Ruahine. 
4703. Minute Jungermannia, on Fagus, Puketaramea. 
4704. Fungus on Astelia leaves,      	ditto. 
4705. Lichen on Podocarpus Cunningham., forests, Ruahine. 
4706.   ditto,		ditto,		ditto
4707. A curious something (Fungus?) of which I have 2 sps. from same locality. 
4708. Jungermannia, trees, Ngawakatatara. 
4709. Marchantia, sides of a stream, nr. Ruahine. 
4710. Moss on Fuchsia excorticata, forests, Patea. 
4711. Jungermannia, on bark, Patea. 
4712. 	ditto	    Patea
4713. 	ditto	    Patea
4714.      ditto,  in water,	Patea
4715.      ditto, forests, nr. Patea: a very fragrant species smelling like “old brown Windsor Soap.”
4716.     ditto.  on bark,	Patea	
4717. Black Fungus, on Podocarpus spicata, ditto. 
4718. Lichen	  on ditto. 	        ditto. 
4719. Fungus on Drimys, River Taruarau, all but quite destroyed by insects. 
4720. Jungermannia, plains, nr. R. Taruarau: a very curious sp. J. bicolor, W.C. 
4721. Jungermannia ? high plains, nr. Taruarau. 
4722. Jungermannia,   on trees,	Patea. 
4723. ditto,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4724. ditto,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4725. ditto,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4726. Lichen,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4727. Moss, crags, above R. Taruarau. 
4728. ditto	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4729. ditto, 	plains, nr.      d––––––––––  
4730. ditto,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4731. Lichen, banks of R. Taruarau. 
4732. ditto,  d––––––––––––––––––––
4733. ditto, olive colored bladdery, unique, forest, top of high hill above R. Taruarau. 
4734. ditto, crags above same R. 
4735. Black Fungus on tree, top of base hill above ditto; tree, bushy, 9 ft. & wholly covered, quite black!
4736. Jungermannia (with Hymenophyllum), dry plains, Taruarau. 
4737. Lichen, (Cladonia), ––––––––––		ditto. 
4738. ditto,   (Cenomyce), ––––––––––		ditto. 
4739. ditto,   (  ditto  ) –––––––––– 		ditto. 
4740. ditto, on pebbles banks of R. Taruarau (bis). 
4741. ditto, on Leptospermum,   d––––––––––. 
4742. Lot of sundry scraps, from the interior. 
4743. Curious sub-echinated Fungus (Lycoperdon?)  ditto. My only sp. 
4744. Lichen, on trees, Moeangiangi, Hawke’s Bay. 
4745. Moss, &c., watercourse, nr. ditto. 
4746. Alga?  cliffs, 	ditto. 
4747. Lichen, on ground, hills, nr. ditto. 
4748. Fungus on Coriaria leaves,  ditto. 
4749. Lichen, on Edwardsia, Moeangiangi. 
4750. ditto,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4751. ditto,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4752. ditto,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4753. Jungermannia, on Myoporum, d––––––––
4754. Lichen,	  cliffs, –––––––––– d––––––––––
4755. Ditto,      	  on  Myoporum, –– d––––––––––
4756. Marchantia, on ground, –––––––   d––––––––––
4757. Fungus, &c., on living trees, road to d––––––––
4758. Red vegetable matter, on ground, shaded path, Mission land. 
4759. Green d–––––––––– d––––––––––, on  old fungus, (No. 5326,) nr. Tang. 
4760. Curious lungs-like veg., ford, R. Maraetotara. 
4761. Jungermannia, glen, nr. Cape Kidnapper. 
4762.  ditto                from ditto. 
4763.  ditto	   d––––––––––
4764.  ditto	   d––––––––––
4765.  ditto (& Anthoceros), d––––
4766.  ditto, ––––––– d––––––––––
4767. Lichen, growing in large patches in Corynocarpus lævigata, glen at Waimaramara. 
4768. Fungus, on leaves of Pittosporum, from ditto. 
4769. Portion of a curious & gorgeous Fungus, found growing on the top of an old stump, in same glen: – of an oval shape, about 9 x 5. 
4770. Marchantia, ground, hills, nr. Cape Kidnapper. 
4771. Conferva?  wet cliffs, close to sea, Waimarama. 
4772.  ditto,	d–––––––––– d––––––––––
4773.  ditto,	d–––––––––– d––––––––––
4774.  ditto,	d–––––––––– d––––––––––
4775. Moss?	d–––––––––– d––––––––––
4776. Alga,	d–––––––––– d––––––––––
4777. Alga, wet cliffs, nr. Waimarama. 
4778. Minute Confervoid plant, on ground, nr. Cape Kidnapper. 
4779. Green vegetable, under water, from stream Waikaha. 
4780. Fungus on Carex, banks of R. Waikaha. 
4781.  ditto, on bark of Alectryon, from Kohinurakau. 
4782. Marchantia, from Waikaha. 
4783. Black Fungus on Myoporum, nr. Cape Kidnapper. 
4784. Alga (2 species?), stream nr. Kahuraanake. 
4785. Moss, from ditto. 
4786. Moss, wet cliffs, Waimarama. 
4787. Lichen, on Leptospermum, from Kohinurakau. 
4788. Fungus, on Podocarpus dacrydioides, Mission Station. 
4789. Alga, on stones, in Tukituki River. 
4790.  ditto, on Mosses, &c., in a stream at Te Kaokaoroa. 
4791. Jungerm. & Alga, sides of a streamlet, nr. Kohinurakau. 
4792. Marchantia,		d–––––––––– d––––––––––
4793. Moss,		d–––––––––– d––––––––––
4794. Lichen, on pumice, dry banks, nr. Mission Station. 
4795. ditto,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––  
4796. ditto, on bark of Podocarpus dacryds., d––––––––––
4797. Moss, growing with 4791. 
4798. Alga, wet cliffs, nr. Waimarama (bis?). 
4799. Fungus, on Friesia, thicket, nr. Cape Kidnapper. 
4800. Vegetable, on ground, hill sides, d––––––––––
4801. Lichen, on ground, dry banks, nr. Mission Station. 
4802.  ditto, on crags, nr. Castle Point. 
4803.  ditto, on rocks, E. Coast. 
4804.  ditto,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4805.  ditto, on stones, plains, Wairarapa. 
4806.  ditto, on bark, forest, Wairarapa. 
4807.  ditto?  on a pebble in a streamlet, Owahanga, E. Coast. 
4808. Vegetable substance, on pebbles in a clear stream, in the dense forest between Te Hawera & Manawatu: – all the pebbles and stones in this stream have a coating of red. 
4809. ditto, from another stream in the same dense forest. 
4810. Lichen, on rocks, nr. Oroi, a little N. of Cape Palliser. 
4811. ditto, (very elegant., d––––––––––––––––––––
4812. ditto	            d––––––––––
4813. ditto 	            d––––––––––
4814. ditto	            d––––––––––
4815. ditto	            d––––––––––
4816. ditto	            d––––––––––
4817. ditto	            d––––––––––
4818. ditto	            d––––––––––
4819. ditto	            d––––––––––
4820. ditto	            d––––––––––
4821. Alga?  fresh water stream, village of Oroi. 
4822. Lichen, crags, at Ngapihau, E. Coast. 
4823. ditto, on rocks, nr. road from Pahawa to Ngapihau. 
4824. ditto,	d––––––––––
4825. ditto,	d––––––––––
4826. ditto,	d––––––––––
4827. ditto,	d––––––––––
4828. Fungus, on leaf of Cordyline, from Mission Garden. 
4829. ditto, on Melicytus, nr. Cape Kidnapper. 
4830. ditto,  from Wairarapa. 
4831. ditto, on bark of Metrosideros robusta, dense forest, nr. Te Hawera. 
4832. Jungermannia, on ditto, –––––––––– d––––––––––
4833. Lichen, on Laurus,        –––––––––– d––––––––––
4834. Fungus on rotten wood, –––––––––– d––––––––––
4835. Jungermannia, on bark of Dacrydium cupressinum, 
4836. Moss, from a bog, at the head of Wairarapa Valley. [scrap]?
4837. Moss, from a wood, at Te Kotukutuku, ditto. 
4838. Lichen, on Podocarpus ferruginea, d–––––––d–––––
4839. ditto,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4840. ditto?	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4841. Jungermannia, on bark of trees, Wairarapa. 
4842. ditto,	d–––––––––– d–––––––––
4843. ditto, on rotten wood,        d––––––––––
4844. Fungus, woods, Wairarapa. 
4845. Lichen, on Corynocarpus, from Te Unuunu, nr. Castle Point. 
4846. Fungus, on dead Veronica, nr. Cape Turnagain. 
4847. ditto, (or punctures of an insect, or disease), on leaves of Myoporum, Akitio, nr. ditto. 
4848. Lichen, on pebbles, plains, Wairarapa. 
4849. ditto, on d–––––d––––– Te Waipukurau. 
4850. Large red fungus, logs, forests, Wairarapa. 
  4850α. ditto, from Te Witi, head of R. Manawatu, top velvety. 
4851. Jungermannia, on Fagus bark, head of Wairarapa valley. 
4852. ditto, on Metrosids. robusta, forest, nr. Manawatu. 
4853. ditto, on     ditto, –––––––––– d––––––––––
4854. Lichen?  on leaves of Laurus,   d––––––––––
4855. Fungus, on frond of Dicksonia, d––––––––––
4856. Jungermannia, a stipe of Dicksonia, nr. Te Hawera. 
4857. ditto,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4858. ditto,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4859. ditto, from a bog, head of Wairarapa Valley. 
4860. ditto, upper branches of a tree, forest, nr. Te  Hawera. 
4861. Lichen, on rotten log, d–––––––––– from ditto. 
4862. Minute Jungermannia, (2 sps.), growing with 4859. 
4863. Lichen, on Melicytus, Te Kotukutuku, Wairarapa. 
4864. Jungermannia, on ditto,	 d–––––––––––––––––––
4865. ditto,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4866. Jungermannia, & 2 or 3 small Lichens, on Melicytus, from ditto. 
4867. Lichen,   d––––––––––––––     on ditto    d–––––––––
4868. ditto, on Knightia, forests, Wairarapa. 
4869. ditto,   on ditto, d–––––––– d––––––––
4870. Minute Jungermannia, on foregoing No. 
4871. fine Jungermannia, on Coriaria, Wairarapa. 
4872. Small ditto,      with foregoing. 
4873. ditto, on bark of Metrosideros robusta, ditto. 
4874. Lichen, on Hedycaria, from Te Kotukutuku. 
4875. ditto,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4876. ditto,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4877. Jungermannia, d––––––––  d––––––––––    
4878. ditto,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4879. ditto,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4880. ditto, on living trees, nr. Te Hawera; presenting a curious spiked appearance. 
4881. ditto, on ditto, between Te Hawera & R. Ruamahanga. 
4882. ditto,	d––––––––––––––––––  
4883. ditto,	d––––––––––––––––––    
4884. ditto, (with foregoing)      d–––––––––  
4885. ditto, on Elæocarpus,	      d–––––––––  
4886. ditto, on trees,	      d–––––––––  
4887. delicate white Fungus, on Metrosids. robusta, ditto. 
4888. Lichen, on trees,	d–––––––––––––––––ditto. 
4889. Frondose Jungermannia, on ground, ––––––––ditto. 
4890. ditto,	ditto, ––––––––––––––––––       ditto.  
4891. Sundry Jungermannia, on Elæocarpus, –––––  ditto. 
4892. Lichen, on Suttonia, nr. Hurunuiorangi, Wairarapa. 
4893. ditto,	on ditto,	d––––––––––––––––––    
4894. ditto,	on ditto,	d––––––––––––––––––    
4895. ditto,	on ditto,	d––––––––––––––––––    
4896. Fungus, on logs, forest, nr. Te Hawera. 
4897. Jungermannia, on Suttonia, nr. Hurunuiorangi. 
4898. ditto,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
4899. ditto,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
(4900-4999 absent from original)
5000. Vegetable matter, on ground, under Corynocarpus trees, shags’ resting-place, Ahuriri. 
5001. Lichen, with carmine colored shields, on Edwardsia, from Huaangarua. 
5002. ditto, with brown ditto,   on ditto. 
5003. Fungus, (puff ball)  dry forests. 	)  All, I regret
5004. ditto, hills, road from Tangoio. 	)  in a bad
5005. ditto, with shining (varnished)	)  state!
 top, Mission Station   		)  
5006. Lichen, on Plagianthus, from Huaangarua. 
5007. ditto,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
5008. ditto, on fence of Chapel, Ngaawapurua, R. Manawatu. 
5009. ditto,	ditto, 		d–––––––––– 
5010. ditto,	d–––––––––  	d––––––––––
5011. ditto,	d–––––––––  	d––––––––––
5012. ditto,	d–––––––––  	d––––––––––
5013. ditto,	d–––––––––  	d––––––––––
5014. ditto,	d–––––––––  	d––––––––––
5015. Jungermannia, on ditto,		d––––––––––
5016. Black Fungus, on a dead tree, dry bed of same river. 
5017. Lichen,	d––––––––––	d––––––––––
5018. Fungus,	d––––––––––	d––––––––––
5019. ditto,  on a stick ––––––––––	d––––––––––
5020. Lichen, on rocks, Cape Palliser. 
5021. ditto, on white rocks, at Pamoteao, a point 20 miles N. of Cape Palliser, perhaps 2 sp?
5022. ditto, from Pamoteao. 
5023. White Fungus on young Aralia, from Hurunuiorangi. 
5024. Lichen, on stones, ––––––––––       ditto. 
5025. Lichen, on stones, from Hurunuiorangi. 
5026. ditto, on bark,	ditto. 	)
5027. Small Jungermannia, on d–– d––	)
5028. Lichen, on rocks washed by spray, below h. w. mk., at Awhea, E. Coast. 
5029. ditto, on rocks, descending to Awheanui, E. Coast. 
5030. ditto,	d––––––––––––––––––––
5031. ditto,	d––––––––––––––––––––
5032. ditto,	d––––––––––––––––––––
5033. ditto,	d––––––––––––––––––––
5034. ditto,	on rocks, nr. Pahawa. 
5035. ditto,	d––––––––––––––––
5036. ditto,	d––––––––––––––––
5037. ditto,	on rocks, Pahawa. 
5038. ditto	    d––––––––––	
5039. ditto?	    d––––––––––
5040. Jungermannia, on bark, forest, Te Hawera. 
5041. Splendid Lichen, on Plagianthus, from Te Kaikokirikiri. 
5042. Lichen, (perhaps 2 sp.,) on ditto, from   d––––––––––
5043. ditto, –––––––––– 	on d––––––––––––––––––––
5044. ditto, ––––––––––         on d––––––––––––––––––––
5045. ditto, ––––––––––	on d––––––––––––––––––––
5046. ditto, ––––––––––	on d––––––––––––––––––––
5047. Jungermannia, ––––––  on d––––––––––––––––––––
5048. Frondose Jungermannia ground, road from Waimarama. 
5049. Moss, crags, ––––––––––––––––––– nr. ditto. 
5050. Targionia, ditto, –––––––––– hill, Kahuraanake. 
5051. Lichen,    ditto, –––––––––– hills. 
5052. Fungus, on rotten trees, forests, the white part hidden. 
5053. ditto, ––––––––––––––––––––
5054. a curious ditto (Geaster-like) my only specimen; found by a Native travelling with me from Te Hawera, on the ground. 
5055. Minute stipitate Fungus, on Phormium, from Te Kaikokirikiri. 
5056. Fungus, on leaves of Gnaphalium; ditto. 
5057. Red Fungus? on bark, forests, Te Hawera. 
5058. Small stipitate Fungus, on bark, from ditto. 
5059. Lichen, on stones, Hurunuiorangi. 
5060. Jungermannia, forests, Te Hawera. 
5061. Jungermannia, on bark, Tapuata forest, R. Manawatu. 
5062. 	ditto,	d––––––––––––––––––––	
5063. 	ditto,	d––––––––––––––––––––
5064. 	ditto,	d––––––––––––––––––––
5065. 	ditto,	d––––––––––––––––––––
5066. 	ditto,	d––––––––––––––––––––
5067. 	ditto,	d––––––––––––––––––––
5068. 	ditto,	d––––––––––––––––––––
5069. 	ditto,	d––––––––––––––––––––
5070. 	ditto,	d––––––––––––––––––––
5071. 	ditto,	d––––––––––––––––––––
5072. 	ditto,	d––––––––––––––––––––
5073. 	ditto,	d––––––––––––––––––––
5074. 	ditto,	d––––––––––––––––––––
5075. 	ditto, (several) d––––––––––––––––
5076. 	Lichen,	d––––––––––––––––––––
5077. 	ditto,	d––––––––––––––––––––
5078. 	ditto,	d––––––––––––––––––––
5079. 	ditto, (2 sp?) d–––––––––––––––––
5080. 	ditto,	d––––––––––––––––––––
5081. Fungus on a green coleopterous insect; (mentioned, L. J. Botany, vol. iii p.46) – same woods. 
5082. Lichen on Fuchsia, head of R. Manawatu. 
5083. 	ditto, ditto, –––––––––– forests, nr. ditto. 
5084. 	ditto,	d––––––––––––––––––––
5085. Lichen, forests, nr. head of River Manawatu. 
5086. Jungermannia,	ditto. 
5087. Lichen, on bark,	ditto. 
5088. ditto & Jungerma., on ditto, from ditto. 
5089. Lichen?  on ditto,	d––––––––––
5090. Minute Jungermannia,? on rotten log, forest beyond Te Hawera. 
5091. Minute Jungermannia? under water, bog, head of Wairarapa. 
5092. Jungermannia, on bark, from Te Kotukutuku. 
5093. Lichen & Junga., on branch, 	ditto. 
5094. Lichen, on trees,––––––––––	ditto. 
5095. ditto, on bark, ––––––––––	ditto. 
5096. ditto, on fallen branches,	ditto. 
5097. ditto, (Nephroma) on branch, 	ditto; this sp. is also very plentiful on smooth stones in the forest there, where it forms large circular patches, but immoveable, and always barren. 
5098. Fungus, on Dacrydium cupressinum, Wairarapa. 
5099. Lichen, upper branches of a fallen tree, forest, nr. Te Hawera. 
5100. Frondose Jungermannia, on rotten log, forest, nr. Te Hawera. 
5101. Elegant minute ditto, growing under preceding. 
5102. Lichen, upper branches of a fallen tree, –––ditto. 
5103. Jungermannia, on Laurus, ––––––––––––	ditto. 
5104.   ditto,  ––––––––––––––––––––––––––––	ditto. 
5105. Fungus, on Moss,––––––––––––––––––––	ditto. 
5106. Minute Jungermannia, on bark,   –––––––	ditto. 
5107. Fungus?  on Laurus, ––––––––––––––––––	ditto. 
5108. Red Fungus on rotten log, –––––––––––––	ditto. 
5109. Jungermannia, on Plagianthus bark, –––––	ditto. 
5110. Lichen, (a dense moss, upwards of 16 oz). Upper branch, ditto. 
5111. Jungermannia, on leaves of Laurus, –––––– ditto. 
5112. Lichen, (Nephroma,) on upper branch, –––– ditto. 
5113. Moss, growing in a stream, in same forest. 
5114. Jungermannia? growing in same stream, ditto. 
5115. Little Moss, wet spot, same wood. 
5116. Lichen,	ditto	ditto. 
5117. Moss,	ditto	ditto. 
5118. Minute Jungermannia,	ditto. 
5119. Fungus, on rotten Astelia, ditto. 
5120. Jungermannia, on Fuchsia, – its common garb. –	ditto. 
5121. Junga., growing with foregoing. 
5122. Elegant Jungermannia, on Plagianthus, Te Kaikokirikiri. 
5123. Jungermannia, on ditto,	     from ditto. 
5124. ditto,	on Podocarpus spicata, from ditto. 
5125. ditto,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
5126. Lichen,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
5127. Sundries, scraps, head of Wairarapa. 
5128. Minute Jungermannia?  with 5061, &c. 
5129. Rough puff ball fungi, hills, above Tangoio. 
5130. Smooth	ditto	ditto,	ditto. 
5131. Lichen in pebble,  Hurunuiorangi. 
5132. ditto, on Myoporum, Petani, nr. Ahuriri. 
5133. Interesting Jungermannia, rocks, thicket, nr. Cape Turnagain. 
5134. Jungerma., on dead Corynocarpus, –––––––––  ditto. 
5135. Fungus, on Phormium, –––––––––––––––––––  ditto. 
5136. Jungerma., on bark of Dacrydm. cupressm., nr.   ditto. 
5137. Lichen, on dead Coriaria, nr. Castle Point. 
5138. Minute fungus on grass culms, hills above Tangoio. 
5139. Lichen, rocks, Te Humenga, Palliser Bay. 
5140. ditto,  on shrubs, Huaangarua. 
5141. ditto,	ditto,	ditto. 
5142. Fungus?	ditto,	ditto. 
5143. Lichen, on Veronica,	ditto. 
5144. Lichen, on rocks, nr. Cape Palliser. 
5145. ditto, (with Carmine-colored shields,) on Edwardsia, Huaangarua. 
5146. ditto, (with black ditto,)	  ditto,	ditto. 
5147. ditto, (with brown usceolate ditto,) ditto,	ditto. 
5148. ditto, (with blackish ditto,) foliaceous, ditto, ditto. 
5149. ditto, (with brown) ditto,) expanding,  ditto, ditto. 
5150. Large Lichen, (rarely ever in fruit,) trunks of trees, forests. 
5151. Fungus & Jungerma., on Coriaria, Te Kotukutuku. 
5152. Delicate white fungus, on Jungerma., woods, w. ditto. 
5153. Alga, on stones, in a pool, wood, nr. Te Hawera. 
5154. veg. substance, on a stone, from ditto. 
5155. Moss, from a stream, same wood. 
5156. Veg. substance, parasitical on Moss, under water, ditto. 
5157. Alga, sides of same pool, as 5153. 
5158. Fungus, on Aralia leaf, forest, w. ditto. 
5159. ditto, on willow leaves, Mission garden. 
5160. ditto, on Aralia, –––––––––  ditto. 
5161. Lichen, on Edwardsia, road from Kohinurakau. 
5162. ditto,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
5163. Jungermannia, on trees, Ngawakatatara. 
5164. Lichen & Junga., (scrap,)	ditto. 
5165. Lichen, forest, between Te Hawera & R. Manawatu. 
5166. ditto,	d–––––––––––––––––––. 
5167. ditto,	d–––––––––––––––––––. 
5168. ditto,	d–––––––––––––––––––. 
5169. ditto, from Te Atuaomahura – topmost crag of Ruahine. 
5170. Jungermannia, with foregoing. 
5171. ditto, on Fagus, ½ way up Ruahine. 
5172. Lichen?	ditto	  ditto. 
5173. ditto, grounds, on top of ditto. 
5174. ditto, d–––––––––  d––––––––––. 
5175. Moss, on trees & ground, ½ way up Ruahine. 
5176. Lichen, &c., on ground, exposed craggy tops, W.side. 
5177. Jungermannia?  	with ditto,	ditto. 
5178. Lichen, on ferns, &c., –––––ditto,	ditto. 
5179. Black Moss?  on crags,      –––––––––	ditto. 
5180. Green veg. matter, on ground, near top of range. 
5181. Scaly ditto,		d–––––––––  d–––––––––  
5182. Black Fungus, on Fagus,	      d–––––––––  
5183. ditto,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
5184. Lichen, on crags, near top of range. 
5185. Jungermannia, &c., on ground, 	ditto. 
5186. Lichen, on Fagus,   –––––––––   ditto. 
5187. Small ditto, with preceding, ––– ditto. 
5188. ditto,	on ditto, ––––––––ditto. 
5189. Sphærophoron, from Fagus woods nr. top: this sp. stains paper in drying. Sph. coloratum?  W.C. 
5190. Lichen & Jungermannia, on Moss, crags, near top. 
5191. Moss, woods, ½ way up. 
5192. Black fungus, on Fagus, nr. top. 
5193. Lichen, on stones, sides of R. Makororo. 
5194. Moss,	ditto,	ditto. 
5195. Lichen, on trees, at Te Heiotepooro; bleak crags, W. side. 
5196. ditto,   on ditto,     woods; – ½ way up. 
5197. ditto,   on ditto,	d–––––––––,  ditto. 
5198. ditto,   on Fagus,	d–––––––––;   near top. 
5199. ditto, (Thelotrema,)	on aged trees, Ruahine. 
5200. Curious dark green vegetable, parasitical on Mosses, &c., sides of R. Makororo. 
5201. Lichen, from woods near tops. 
5202. Moss,  ditto––––––––– . 
  5202α. 	Jungermannia, with ditto. 
5203. Black Fungus on Fagus, forests, Ruahine. 
5204. Lichen? on dead branch, forests, base of Ruahine. 
5205. Jungermannia, parasitical on a small plant, from summit. 
5206. Lichen, forests, Ruahine. 
5207. ditto,	d –––––––––.  
5208. ditto,	d –––––––––.  
5209. Fungus (Antennaria) on Aralia, R. Makororo. 
5210. Small black Lichens (2?) on stones, summit, Ruahine. 
5211. Small Lichen, on bark, forests Ruahine. 
5212. Moss, growing in large lumps, trees, d ––––, d ––––. 
5213. Fungus (Antennaria), –––––––trees, d ––––, d ––––.  
5214. Jungermannia, on trees, ditto. 
5215. Black Fungus, on Veronica, from “Te Heiotopooro” (5195). 
5216. Stereocaulon, on stones, woods, Ruahine. 
5217. Lichen, on trees, d ––––––––– d –––––––––.  
5218. Stereocaulon, on stones, d –––––––––. d –––––––––.  
5219. Black lichen? on ground, bare exposed spots, Ruahine. 
5220. Fine Lichen, on Suttonia, Mokaipatea, 	ditto. 
5221. Moss, exposed crags above “Puke Taramea”. ditto. 
5222. ditto, snow runs, Oparapara, summit,	ditto. 
5223. Lichen, ground, Fagus, woods, nr. top. 
5224. Moss, Fagus woods, ½ way up. 
5225. Stereocaulon,   ditto,       ditto, (comp. w. 5218.)
5226. Lichen (Peltigera), ground, woods, nr. R. Waikamaka
5227. ditto,  on Moss, base of a tree, head of R. Makororo. 
5228.  ditto, woods, Ruahine. 		)
  5228α. Minute Jungermannia, on ditto. 	)
5229. Black Lichen rocks, summit of Ruahine. 
5230. Targionia?  from R. Makororo. 
5231. Green veg. matter, wet cliff, R. Waipoua. 
5232. Jungermannia, growing with 5222. 
5233. Marchantia, R. Makororo. 
5234. Lichen (Stereocaulon), forests, Ruahine. 
5235. Minute Jungermannia, with 5222. 
5236. Branch of an elegant sp. of Sphærophoron?  Ruahine. 
5237. Fungus on rotten Fagus, Ruahine. 
5238. Lichen (Usnea), woods, ditto. 
5239. ditto,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
5240. Sphærophoron,   d––––: a scarce sp., & only a branch. 
5241. ditto,	–– d––––––––––: a scarce sp. 
5242. ditto. 	–– d––––––––––: much more common. 
5243. ditto	–  d––––––––––: (a var. ? of preceding). 
5244. Lichen, grows to a large size on Mosses, & on Fagus trees; Ruahine, near top. 
5245. ditto, (Usnea,)	     d––––––––––. 
5246. ditto, (Usnea,)     ditto; – a common sp. everywhere in these forests; but the specimens of 2 Taxaceous plants therein enclosed, are equally uncommon. 
5247. ditto, on Edwardsia, from Moeangiangi. 
5248. Jungermannia, with 5222. 
5249. ditto	–––––––––– d––––––––––
5250. ditto	–––––––––– d––––––––––
5251. ditto, from near the top. 
5252. ditto,	–––––––––– d––––––––––
5253. ditto,	–––––––––– d––––––––––
5254. ditto,	–––––––––– d––––––––––
5255. ditto, (scrap)	–––––––––– d––––––––––
5256. ditto, (scrap) 		     d––––––––––
5257. part of a woody fungus, forest, Ruahine. 
5258. Fungus, hills above Tangoio, Hawke’s Bay. 
5259. ditto, from an old log in a thicket, nr. ditto. 
5260. Vegetable on a stone under crater, near Tangoio. 
5261. Vegetable, on clay, side of watercourse, thicket, nr. Tangoio. 
5262. ditto,       on ditto, forming large cinerous patches, barren hills, ditto. 
5263. Lichen, on bark, (scrap.)     ditto. 
5264. ditto, on ground, road from Kohinurakau. 
5265. ditto,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
5266. Fungus, on Coriaria), from Te Tamumu village. 
5267. ditto, on Veronica, from Kohinurakau,  ditto. 
5268. Lichen (Nephroma) on Podocarpus spicata, Ngawakatatara. 
5269. ditto, on bark, from Te Aute. 
5270. ditto, (Usnea) on Podocarpus spicata, from near Te Aute. 
5271. Jungermannia, a very elegant sp., on charred logs, ditto: J. rubens. 
5272. Fungus on Gnaphalium, plains, nr. Te Tamumu: vide, 5051
5273. Lichen, on charred logs, w. 5271. 
5274. ditto,	d–––––––––  d––––––––––
5275. Jungermannia? d–––––––– d––––––––––
5276. Lichen, on bark of Podocarpus dacrydiodes, Patangata. 
5277. ditto,	  d–––––––––– 		d––––––
5278. Jungermannia, d–––––––––– 		d––––––
5279. ditto,	  d–––––––––– 		d––––––
5280. Lichen, on Pumice, dry banks, nr. Mission Station
5281. ditto. 		d–––––––– 	d––––––
5282. ditto, on a pebble, 	d–––––––– 	d––––––
5283. ditto,		d––––––––	d––––––
5284. ditto,		d–––––––– 	d––––––
5285. ditto. on a shell,	d––––––––	d––––––
5286. Fungus, on Phormium, Mission Station. 
5287. ditto, on Gooseberry bark, d––––––––––: I had a quantity, it was all thrown into the fire!
5288. ditto, (green mould,) on wood, Mission Station. 
5289. Curious little things in soil brought me from Pakiaka (Podocarpus dacrydiodes) forest, Heretaunga. 
5290. Curious fungus? on leaves of Friesia, wood, R. Manawatu. 
5291. Lichen on living Leptospermum, from Te Kaikokirikiri. 
5292. Fungus, on cow-dung, Mission Station. 
5293. ditto, from ditto, but always underneath & in the dark. 
5294. ditto, on paper, in a box, in my damp store. 
5295. ditto, from end of another box, ditto. 
5296. ditto, on Veronica, Petani, nr Ahuriri. 
5297. Moss  ––––––––––––––––––––, ditto
5298. Fungus, trees, woods, – Hawke’s Bay. 
5299. Fungus, on Hoheria, d–––––– d–––––––. 
5300. Black fungus on leaves of Piper excelsum, from nr. C. Kidnappers. 
  5300α. 	  ditto,	d–––––––––––––––––, from Tangoio. 
5301. Fungus, on Arundo, Hawke’s Bay, near Station. 
5302. ditto,   on leaves of Calystegia,   ditto    ditto. 
5303. ditto,   on stem of Clianthus, Mission Garden. 
5304. ditto,   on ditto of Tree Mallow,    ditto. 
5305. ditto,   on leaves of Elm,                ditto. 
5306. ditto,   on a leaf (Aralia), from Ruahine. 
5307. ditto,   on rotten wood. 
5308. ditto?  (or, it may be, an inner bark,) on firewood. 
5309. Little moss, among grass, hills, near Waikaha. 
5310. Vegetable matter, light green color, sub-gelatinous, on mosses, &c., snow runs, top of Ruahine. 
5311. Red ditto, pathways, low grounds, nr. Petani. 
5312. Scrap of a Moss, from near Ahuriri. 
5313. ditto of a Lichen, from      ditto. 
5314. Red veg. matter, earthy sides of well, Mission Station. 
5315. Frondose Jungermannia, glen, Mokaipatea. 
5316. Lichen, on pebbles, dry banks, nr. Ahuriri. 
5317. Lichen, on Podocarp. Cunningh., dry forests, Ruahine. 
5318. ditto,   on    ditto. 
5319. Sundry Jungermannia, in Podocarpus Cunningham., Ruahine. 
5320. Fungus, parasitical on Mosses, Ruahine: vide, 5227. 
5321. ditto,   from garden, on ground. 
5322. Fruit of a Phormium, high lands, interior, nr. Patea. 
5323. Fungus on leaves of Pittosporum. 
5324. ditto. on ditto   of Alectryon. 
5325. ditto, on ditto of Hedycaria (2 or 3 species?). 
5326. Large Fungus, barren hills, common; eaten by Natives. 
5327. Fungus on wheat-flour-paste for books; of a lovely violet color when fresh. 
5328. Jungermannia, from a stream nr. Tangoio. 
5329. Moss?	  from     ditto. 
5330. Small Jungermannia, woods, Ruahine	)
5331. ditto, from a pit, near hill Kahuraanake	) all from	
5332. ditto (scrap)				)
5333. ditto				) woods,	
5334. ditto				) interior;
5335. ditto				) 	
5336. ditto				)
5337. ditto (scraps)				) and all	
5338. Moss (only 3 specimens)		)
5339. ditto,  Ruahine. 			) from
5340. ditto, wet woods, Manawatu. 		)
5341. ditto, under water, same woods. 		) my little	
5342. Lichen, ground, among fern. 		)
5343. Small black Fungus on half-of a leaf!	) pocket
5344. ditto, on grapes, garden. 		)
5345. Scraps of phænog. plants. 1. Flowers of	) book
 larger  coprosma: 2. of Tillæa;  3. of Isolepis? )
     4. of a minute plant from snow runs, top of Ruahine. 
5346. Fossil wood?  in peat from Tamaki R., head of River Manawatu. 
5347. Ditto,  fine, from near Cape Palliser. 
5348. Ditto, from R. Thames: probably sent you before?  I can send you more, if required. 
5349. Fungus?  under wood in garden. 
5350. ditto, on hoop of a cask from ditto
––––––––––––––––––

Algæ, &c. 
(Fresh-water)
5351. From a stream, subalpine heights, above Kuripapango. 
5352. ––––– rocks, river’s side, ––––––––––	ditto. 
5353. Reddish, on snow-drifts, heights, above Taruarau. 
5354. From a pool, plain, Taruarau. 
5355.    ditto,	    ditto. 
5356. From a watercourse, ditto; a beautiful object.     )
5357. –––––––––––––––––ditto; gelatinous, floating. )
5358. Pools, plain, sides, of R. Rangitikei. 
5359. ––––––––––, near Paharakeke, (Patea);
5360. ––––––––– , in Paharakeke wood, (ditto). 
5361. From a watercourse, nr. Maungarei. 
5362. –––––––––––––––––nr. Ngaruroro, Heretaunga. 
5363. on stones, under water, R. Mangaotai. 
5364. ditto, watercourse nr. R. Makororo. 
5365. ditto, R. Makororo. 
5366.   ditto,	ditto. 
5367.   ditto, upper part of  ditto. 
5368.   ditto,     ditto. 
5369. Alga, from R. Makororo. 
5370.   ditto,          ditto. 
5371. from snow well, top of Ruahine. 
5372. ––––– R. Makororo. 
5373. –––––––rivulet, side of R. Ngaruroro. 
5374. from snow-well, top: – comp. w. 5371. 
5375. ––––––– watercourse, R. Makororo. 
5376. ––––––– cliffs, R Makororo. 
5377. ––––––– watercourse “Te Ngaere,”  Heretaunga. 
5378. ––––––– stream, nr. Moeangiangi. 
5379. on Mosses, &c., 1st stream beyond Tangoio. 
5380. on dead docks, in pools, great plain of Ruataniẁa. 
5381. in pools, ditto. 
5382. in ditto,  ditto. 
5383. Curious variegated blubber-like, stream, Ruataniẁa. 
5384. in pools, Te Ruataniẁa. 
5385. in stream at Patangata. 
5386. ––––––– Ngawakatatara. 
5387. ––––––– small streamlet, nr. Ngaruroro. 
5388. in steam at Patangata. 
5389. in ditto, Podocarpus wood, Tangoio. 
5390. waterfall; glen, nr. Waimarama. 
5391. Scrap on Typha from a watercourse. 
5392. from R. Tukituki. 
5393. ––––––– a pool, under Kohinurakau village. 
5394. ––––––– R. Tukituki. 
5395. ––––––– road, Nr. Tangoio. 
5396. ––––––– River Waiohingaanga, nr. Ahuriri. 
5397. ––––––– ditto. 
5398. ––––––– ditto. 
5399. ––––––– 1st water course beyond Tangoio. 
5400. From Tangoio lagoon, at bottom, in deep water. 
5401. ––––––– ditto, –––––––––––––––––––––
5402. ––––––– ditto, shallow water & floating. 
5403. ––––––– ditto,  d –––––––
5404. ––––––– ditto,  d –––––––
5405. ––––––– ditto, d –––––––
5406. ––––––– ditto, d –––––––
5407. ––––––– ditto, d –––––––
5408. ––––––– ford, River Waikaha. 
5409. ––––––– ford, River Maraetotara, growing in clumps. 
5410. ––––––– River Tukituki. 
5411. ––––––– ditto.   ″
5412. ––––––– Wet cliff at Waimarama. 
5413. ––––––– Waimarama River. 
5414. ––––––– pool, in a watercourse, nr. Kohinurakau; very gluey. 
5415. ––––––– a streamlet, near   ditto. 
5416. ––––––– a ditto,       near ditto. 
5417. ––––––– Ngaruroro River, floating. 
5418. ––––––– ditto,    in deep water. 
5419. ––––––– streamlet, nr. Te Kopi, Palliser Bay. 
5420. ––––––– ditto,     d –––––––, d –––––––
5421. ––––––– ditto, at Owahanga, nr. Cape Turnagain. 
5422. ––––––– ditto, wood, Ahiaruhe, Wairarapa. 
5423. ––––––– ditto, nr. Castlepoint. 
5424. ––––––– ditto, nr. ditto: leaves a curious color on paper. 
5425. ––––––– a pool (Rotokura), deep forests, nr. Te Hawera. 
5426. ––––––– a green pool, same forest. 
5427. ––––––– ditto. 
5428. ––––––– a pool, head of Wairarapa Valley. 
5429. ––––––– a stream, nr Oroi, E. Coast. 
5430. ––––––– a ditto,      ditto. 
5431. From River Manawatu. 
5432. From mouth of R. Wangaehu (nr. Cape Turnagain), subject to tidal influences – floating in enormous quantities. 
5433. ––––––– Waitangi R. Hawke’s Bay. 
5434. ––––––– Tangoio Lagoon. 
5435. ––––––– ditto. 
5436. ––––––– ditto: a minute brown sp., on Chara. 
5437. ––––––– R. Tukituki: large, amorphous, bladdery, brown. 
5438. ––––––– Tangoio lagoon. 
5439. On Mosses, woods, Ruahine (scrap.)
5440. Streamlets, woods, interior. 
5441. Alga, from a stream, ditto. 
5442. –––––––, stream nr. Ngawakatatara. 
5443. Green Alga?  from ground, Mission Garden      )
  5443α. –––––––& grown under a glass on wet paper)
––––––––––––––––––

Specimens in Acid & Spirit. ––
––––––––
5444. Phormium (No. 4535, “Tapoto.”)
5445.   ditto,      (No. 4533, “Ẁaranui.”)
5446.   ditto, little species grown in Mission garden; – perianth, outer 3, lemon-colored, inner 3, green: tips of leaves differing from all others. – It was brought down from the interior by the violent winter floods, & being cast up just here was planted. ––
5447.   ditto, (No. 4534, “Aoranga.”)
5448. Sundries: – 1. Phormium, No. 4347. 2. Fruit of Alectryon, No. 4332. 3. fruit of Astelia saxosa, No. 4020. 4. fruit of Viscum, No. 4310. 5. fruit of Coprosma, No. 4191. 6. fruit of Pennantia, No. 4030. 
5449. Sundries; (in spirit,) – 1. orchid, No. 4405.  2. fruit of Fuchsia or Skinnera. 3. orchid. No. 4278. 4. Thelymitra, No. 4236. 5. Gaultheria, No. 4247. 6. Sarcochilus? No. 1957. 7. orchid. 4047. 
––––––––––––––––––

Saltwater Algæ. –
––––––––
5450. Rocks, nr. Cape Palliser. 
5451. Tidal pools.,    ditto. 
5452. Tidal rocks,	    ditto. 
5453. on hard white rocks, nr. ditto. 
5454. tidal rocks at Ngapihau. 
5455.  ditto    nr. Castle Point. 
5456.  ditto          	  ditto. 
5457. in pools, ditto     ditto,  (lichen-like). 
5458. tidal rocks, E. Coast. 
5459.  ditto. 
5460. Rocks, in sand, Ahuriri harbour. 
5461. on shell-fish, Ahuriri harbour. 
5462. inner harbour, Ahuriri. 
5463. on beach, Mission Station. 
5464. tidal rocks, E. Coast. 
5465. on limpet, ditto. 
5466. on tidal rocks, Manawarakau. 
5467.  ditto. 	d–––––––. 
5468. on beaches, E. Coast. 
5469.  ditto,	ditto. 
5470. tidal rocks,	ditto. 
5471. tidal rocks, E. Coast. 
5472. on beaches, ditto. 
5473. on beaches, ditto. 
5474. on beaches, ditto. 
5475. on beaches, ditto. 
5476. on beaches, ditto. 
5477. on beaches, ditto. 
5478. on beaches, ditto. 
5479. on beaches, ditto. 
5480. tidal rocks, nr. Bare Island; only where the water runs out of pools. 
5481. tidal rocks, E. Coast. 
5482. on beaches, ditto. 
5483. on beaches, ditto. 
5484. on beaches, ditto. 
5485. on beaches, ditto. 
5486. on beaches, ditto. 
5487. on beaches, ditto. 
5488. on beaches, ditto. 
5489. on beaches, ditto. 
5490. on beaches, ditto. 
5491. on beaches, ditto. 
5492. on beaches, ditto. 
5493. on beaches, ditto. 
5494. At Palliser Bay; gorgeous when fresh. 
5495. Small green sp. on shells, in brackish water, mouth of R. Waiohingaanga, Hawke’s Bay. 
5496. from ditto. 
5497. ditto   (2 sp. ?)
5498. inner harbour, Ahuriri. 
5499.   ditto,	   ditto. 
5500. on beach, Mission Station
5501	)
  to   	)  on Beaches, E. Coast. 
5763 	)
5764-70. from inner harbour, Ahuriri
5771	)
  to   	)  from E. Coast
6045	)
6049. a lot of scraps: ditto. 
––––––––––––––––
(Corallineæ)
6050	)
  to    	)	from E. Coast. 
6141	)
6142	)   ditto: to me, highly doubtful their being of veg.
  to   	)   origin – including 6150, 
6151	)   Thammasia?
6152. 	Sundry Corallineæ – scraps. –
–––––––––––
II. – Phænog. plants. 
6153. a bottle of Pollen of Typha utilis, with which the Natives make a kind of bread; vide, No. 3937, outer. 
  6153α. dried specimens of plant of T. utilis. 
6154. Amentae (masc.) of a Podocarpus, woods, interior; differing, I think, from P. spicata, perhaps, P. parvifolius, No. 2400. 
6155. Ranunculus, in streams, near Cape Kidnappers, a species having much of the habit of R. macropus, but differing in number & size of petals, &c. Vide, No. 1928, a scrap formerly sent, which I think is the same – R. translucens, W.C. Some specimens are much larger than these sent, but they grow in deeper water. –
6156. Microtis, among ferns halfway up the hill Kahuranake: a fine sp., distinct from “Banksii”, flowg. much later, i.e. in Nov & Dec. 
6157. Pterostylis, ditto,  ditto: apparently very rare. I only got 4 specimens after much search. This is the first ovate leaved specimen I have found in this neighbourhood. I think you will find it to differ from all I have yet sent in being scabrous – scarcely perceptible now, but very so when fresh. – Pt. scabriuscula, W.C. 
6158. Orchid., from among dry crags, nr top of same hill. 
6159. Thelymitra, a fine sp., from ditto,	 ditto. 
6160. Luzula, ––––––––––––––    ditto, ditto. 
6161. Thelymitra, barren hills, between Kahuraanake & Bare Island. 
6162. Adiantum, under crags, near ditto. 
6163. Grammitis, on ground, near ditto: vide. No. 4407. 
6164. Young Fern (Cheilanthes?)  with foregoing. 
6165. Geranium, under and among crags, near Kahuraanake; under side of leaves, colored. 
  6165α. a smaller var. of same?  from crags, higher up. 
6166. Small Galium, ––––––––––––d. ––––––––––––––. 
6167. Orchid; from wet mossy sides of a waterfall between Kahuraanake & Bare Island. A beautiful sight! to see so many there in one spot, flowering vigorously. If this sp. should prove to be ident. with 6158, it is curious that one should be in such a very contrary situation, high & dry. ––
[Corysanthes triloba]
6168. Composit., growing with preceding; &, I know, already sent. 
6169. Small fern (Cheilanthes?) plains, nr. R. Tukituki. 
6170. Fungus on leaves of Microtis Banksii, d. –––––––. 
6171. Small Carex? ––––––––––––––––––    d. –––––––. 
6172. Minute plant, wet spots, ––––––––––– d–––––––. 
6173. Small Carex? ditto. 
[Zoysia sp.]
6174. Scrap, yell. fl. cruciferous plant, ––––. d–––––––. 
6175. Orchid, ––––––––––––––––––––––––. d–––––––. 
6176. Cyperaceæ, bed of Tukituki River. 
6177. Small wh. fl. plant, mud flats, nr. mouth of R. Ngaruroro. 
6178. Fungus on wheat culms, from Waimarama. 
6179. ditto? interstices among crags, top of Kahuraanake. of an indigo color when fresh. 
6180. Calceolaria repens in flower!  at last!! after 7 years patient research!!! all I have. From Te Awarua, nr. side of Ruahine range;  vide, Nos. 1515, & 4114, &c. This sp. differs from  C. rivularis, & from C. Sinclairii, in having its lower lip much more incurved than either, &c, &c. 
6181. I have sent you this pretty little flower – although I scarcely believe it to be a native, just to know about it. I had received some Erica seeds from England, and needing some peat earth, & having none at hand, I sent 2 natives to a pine forest some way off to bring me 2 baskets of earth. In this earth I sowed my Heaths, but none grew; instead of them this lovely blue flower sprang up & flowd. well – It is about 8 inches high, & bears a number of flowers. If it is not known – it is (I suppose) a Native; but I doubt it. – It stains paper a red brown in drying – alike from leaves & petals. 
6182. A leaving sp. of a Composit., not in fl., woods, near Waimarama: probably sent already. 
 
6183. Orchid, plains, near Mission Station. 
6184. Elegant Veronica, shrub, densely bushy & handsome, 3-5 feet high, dry banks, near sea, Hawkes Bay. Comp. with No. 96, from Ahuriri. 
6185. Grass. Hills, nr. Kahuraanake. 
6186.  ditto;	d –––––––. 
6187.  ditto, sides of R. Tukituki. 
6188. Lomaria, (a scrap)  from a swamp nr. Cape Palliser. 
6189. Grass, swamps, near Mission Station: sent before. 
6190. Juncaceæ – from a low headland nr. Castle Point. 

7006-7009 not represented in lists
[Pseudopanax crassifolium, Panax arboreum]

 # 























 
PART 3

Letters and plant lists of the later period (1854-1899)


28 August 1854
Waitangi, Hawke’s
Bay, N. Zealand, Aug. 
28, 1854

My dear Dr Hooker 
A few days ago I was not a little gladdened with a letter from you dated Jan. 6/54. I cannot, however, tell you how very powerfully the sight of your ever welcome handwriting affected me – the more perhaps at this time owing to my present unfortunate & anomalous situation. And now, that an opportunity offers for our nearest post-town, I am wholly determined to avail myself of it – acknowledge yr fresh kindness & endeavor to discharge my debt. 
I am indeed glad to hear that my last packages of Botl. specimens had safely reached yr hands. You may very justly speak of their being “a tremendous time on the road.” – This, however, was not my fault. I must have informed you how greatly I was put to to get them off, owing to the (then) recently calamitous fire, notwithstanding I did get them off in good time, & they reached Wellington at least 3 full weeks before the annual Woolship had completed her cargo. Well in the winter following (July, I think,) just as I was hoping that they were nearing you – I was surprised by a letter from my Wellington Agent, saying, that “the cases for Sir W. Hooker, which they had unforty. omitted (!) they had then shipped in a chance “Vessel” (a whaler homeward bound)!!
Now I knew the cases were scarcely sound when I sent them off – so what with 6 months in a damp Wellgn. store, & a voyage to England in a whaler after 2-3 years in these seas, I had but a very small hope of their reaching you in time, or being fit for anything. However, I still hope to hear, that there are several wee things in that collection of service to you. I shall certainly be disappointed should none of the f. w. algæ sent in that lot prove either new or welcome. 
As I have now a little more time in which to write than I formerly had, I shall endeavour fully to notice several passages of yr letter. – First, then, (& before that I rejoice with you upon the completion of your Phænog. Flora), I must, with all my heart congratulate you upon the birth of a son – or, rather, by the time this will reach your hands, upon his being able to climb up & ride upon your knee & prattle nicely. May Heaven’s best blessing be his & may he prove to be a blessing to you – his parents. Love him with all a father’s love, only don’t idolize him. But I must clip the wings of my paternal feelings, or I am sure I shall not write a syllable on Botany this evening. 
Now then to your great work: well, my dear friend, I do indeed rejoice with you that your have at last realised that labor, & like another Caesar, with a “vice”, put it into the past tense. Last Xmas saw the completion of 4 parts – by this fast approachg. Xmas (with the aid of your able helpers) the remaining parts will I suppose be before the Publr. The first 2 parts I most gladly recd. here in October last, & hope soon to be gratified with the 2 follg. ones – which you speak of, as their being about to be forwarded. – I intend, before I conclude this letter, to give you (in my way) a few remarks en passant upon some portions of the 2 first parts. 
You say, in yr. letter, that, – “Your views of the NZ ferns have no chance of pleasing me.” – Do not say so. I think you do me injustice in supposing (believing?) that I desire to multiply species – as I have ever disliked it. I am well aware that I know very little indeed (save from books) of the Botany of any Country except N.Z.; still, I fancy, I know the specific differences of many N.Z. plants; but there I stop. With reference however to the species of N.Z. Ferns, you should not forget that, upwards of 10 years ago, I proposed to lessen their then already published No. In my little V. D. L. publication I ventured to state, that Niphobolus rupestris, et bicolor, wod. certainly prove to be only one sp. – &, that Doodia aspera, et caudata, et Kunthiana, were also all vars. of one sp. – & subsequently to you personally & by letter, I remarked, that Asplenium polyodon, & lucidum, & obliquum, were only one sp. All this at the outset! & against such first-rate authority as your own dear & honored father, Brown, Richard, D’Urville, the 2 Cunninghams, Sprengel & Forster!!  And I think that I have seen, in the Lond. J. of Boty., one, if not two, species of our ferns, said to be distinct (or, new,) even by Dr Jos. Hooker – (e.g. Asplenium laxum) – which I believe to be only an unproliferous state of A. bulbiferum – & a little Lomaria (pimpinellifolia, I believe, I quote from memory;) which may prove to belong to A. Cunn’s “polymorpha”. ––
Again, you say – “what could I have done with the ‘species’ of ferns you have described had I not the specimens? – From having no Herbarium you have described as new, some of the best known Ferns in the world”. No doubt you are correct in both these statements: but, to the 1st, I rejoin – please, bear in mind that those were published 10 years ago, from my first few & local specimens; while you have subsequently had from me (& no doubt from others) copious suites of specimens of those identical Ferns collected from several localities in N.Z. – to the 2nd., I say that while such may have been found in other Countries, still they were new to this one: – that, preceding Botanists had erred, both in their descript. & habitat of sevl. Ferns, said to be N.Z. (e.g. Hymenm. tortuosum, & secundum, Adiantum formosum (A. Cunn.,) &c., for erroneous habitats; s. Hymenm. semibivalve (see Rarum), & polyanthos, &c., for erroneous description – i.e. if imbricatum is to be united to the former, & villosum to the latter species), which considerably caused me to err: – then, again, what you may term “pinnatifid”, sub, bi, & tri. I may call pinnate, &c. – add to which, the extreme paucity of nearly all old descriptions (not excluding Brown’s), through, I suppose, their zeal for the scant-dozen-word-specific definition of Linnaeus (which you have long ago found to be wholly inadequate). – Lindley has a good sentence highly suitable here which I copy: – “In sacrificing everything to brevity, it is found in practice that doubts or ambiguities are continually created; & for this especial reason, among others, that differential chars. must necessarily be framed upon a considn. of what we know, & not with ref. to what we do not know: on this account a differential char., constructed in the most unexceptionable manner by one botanist, may be unintelligible to another who professes more knowledge, or a greater No. of species.” – (Introdn. to Boty. p.508). However, I had stated that I advanced them as sp. nov. with hesitation, from not having Books of ref. &c. Then again, “dinna forget” how inextricably & interminably involved both the synonymy & descriptions of some of the commonest & best known Ferns have long been. (vid. Sp. trilicum). Who could ever have thought, that one of my last (new N.Z.) Ferns, Adiantum (Busbyanum, W.C.) formosum, Br., only hitherto detected by me in one locality, & that in the densely wooded & untrodden centre of this Island, (& that too, after 20 years incessant travelling with all its concomitant poking & peeping,) should prove to be a spn. abundant & very common about Port Jackson”! & yet erroneously described & confounded by the Cunninghams (who lived there)!! & worse still, the Hookerian Herbarium “without a single specimen”!!!  Further: I venture to fear, that even in the Sp. Filicum there may be some Ferns which are scarcely specifically distinct, or, if specifically distinct, yet naturally nearer to ea. other than even some of my discarded ones. – e.g. (not to stray far,) take the first tab., T xxi, in the last part (v.) of that work; for the life of me I cannot discover a mere var. diff. between those 2 ferns, Adiantum reniforme, & asarifolium; and the next tab., T xxii, is scarcely a remove nearer to the light. I have, however, the vanity to look upon my errors among the N.Z. Filices, as trivial, when compared with some noticed in the Sp. Filicum; – take our British Cystopteris fragilis, as an example. 
I well knew that you would have difficulty with that very Protean fern, Lomaria procera, it has for years puzzled me. Notwithstanding, I believe, that there are several vars. of this sp., – good standard, well marked & common vars., – of which I have sent you specimens. “Pteris falcata”, (which, you tell me, you have rec. from Dr. Sinclair,) I have never seen (judging from Brown’s descriptn.,) but Pteris rotundifolia I have often noticed with ovate, or ovate-acuminate, or even ovate-lanceolate pinnules, (similar to the upperm. pinnules of the figs., tab. CDXXII., Ic. Plant.) but it has never deceived me. 
I confess that I did feel a little vexed at what you said in your last, (dated, “April 29/52”) concerning the Crypts., – (no doubt, my chagrin & disappt. were in no small degree heightened by, if not owing, to the time, which was a highly calamitous one,) but it was only for a very little while. Still as you again speak of the unsatisfactory state of many of my smaller Crypts, I cannot but say a few words on this head. Trust, then, I had vowed to collect and send you everything I could lay hands on!  What an amount of Sisyphean-like, yet pleasing, labor this vow of mine entailed upon me, I alone know. To the keeping of my vow I was further stimulated by your honored Father’s valued letters; – by my (then) being your only collector in a new field; – and, subsequently, by your own published sp. nov., detected on “mouldy biscuit,” – on “the fur of a dead rabbit,” – on “cow-dung”, &c – That some of them (e.g. Jungæ., Algæ, & a few Lichenes,) were neither in fl. nor fr., was my misfortune; but then I knew, that even such unfruitful specimens had not only been collected in these islands by Menzies & yourself, but had also been repeatedly published by both your father & yourself in the Fl. Antarctica, & Musci Exotici; – and, some of your own Algæ (e.g. Chroolepus &c.,) were even to yourself so unsatisfactory, that you hesitated not to speak of them, as “being probably the abnormal state of some Lichen.” – And, that some others of mine were imperfect specimens, (e.g. Marine Algæ,) I also knew but then I considered, that you & others had collected largely of Algæ in these seas, and a very imperfect fragment might (for want of a better) suffice, to give another habitat for species described from the good specimens of a more able & fortunate collector. Was I wrong in thus thinking & acting?  Without doubt, had N.Z. not become colonized, and the writer of this been your only N.Z. collector, his specimens – whether old or young – mouldy or imperfect – would have been more highly valued. But enough of this. –
You speak of a lot of Algæ which I had sent you as having cost you £5. to get them soaked and laid out, & then proving to be of little worth”; – I am sorry for this. I hope, however, that this does not apply to my last lot; in which (in Corallinæ, & f. w. algæ. particularly,) I hope you will have not a few specimens both new & good. 
Again: you rate me soundly about the Astelias; – their not having the ♂ & ♀ identified, &c; – & you say – “You have the species growing, & should exert your sympathetical powers”; ¬– true: but, just allow me to tell you, that while you saw in & near the Bay of Islands the 2 common Northern Astelias (Banksii & Solandri), on almost every tree & cliff – here, the Southern species are only to be found in the very alpine & subalpine woods – a long week’s journey distant, (in the longest days) and rarely there detected in flower except the wee one. 
I still dare to think that you are not quite correct in your opinions respecting some of our N.Z. species. (Pardon me this). For instance, speaking of Phormium, you say, – “I will say, that if you endeavour to unite your Ph. by intermediate forms you will do so too.”  Now here (as I have already said, in a former letter,) as I think, lies the whole error – in the seeking to unite 2 species by taking their aberrant – branching out right & left – sportive, or hybrid forms, which are themselves ever varying, while the species (as species) remain distinct. Such a union may, no doubt, be done with almost any 2 (or more) species of any larger genus; but, as far as I at present see, all such reasoning – or definition – will certainly end in this – the breaking up of all species & genera. A few lines from Pope’s “Essay on Man” are running in my head – not inapplicable here – “What a nice barrier!
	“Forever separate, yet for ever near!
	Remembrance & reflection, how allied!
	What thin partitions sense from thought divide!
	And middle natures, how they long to join,
	Yet never pass the insuperable line!”
I have long been of opinion, (which right or wrong, is daily getting more & more confirmed,) that could we but take a full entire & comprehensive view of both the Animal & Vegetable kingdoms (past & present), – or, further still, – animate and inanimate matter – from the highest created intelligence in the heavens, down down down to the lowest & most vague & amorphous clay or earth, we should see one uninterrupted & effluent stream, which could not (naturally) be divided into families, genera or species!  Perhaps some such delightful & amazing contemplation may form part of the work of man (mind) in a future higher & better state of existence. At present, however, we can only move as children, & so creep on towards walking. – My writing this, brings to mind another portion of that same “Essay” – (which, by the-bye, is an old favorite of mine), – 	
“Vast chain of being!  which from God began,
	Natures ethereal, human, angel, man,
	Beast, bird, fish, insect, what no eye can see,
	No glass can reach; from infinite to thee,
	From thee to nothing.”
All this, you will see, is  hardly more practical than philosophical –
Again, several of my supposed sp. nov. could not appear to be so to me from the incorrectness (or, incompleteness) of the chars. of those closely allied (or, identical) species already published. For, upon only such a cursory examination as I was able to give them, I found them to differ greatly. Hence I made it a practice to give such a trivial name to my sp. nov. or, vars., as should at first glance indicate the differential, This, I suppose, you must long ago have noticed; but just allow me to call your attention to a few examples, here set down from memory & at random. 
		(as published.)	(W.C.’s)
Goodenia repens,	“Fol lanceol.”	G. spathulata. 
Hedycaria scabra,	Fls. not panicled	H. paniculata
Samolus littoralis	“caule terete, &c”	L. verrucosa. 
Euphorbia glauca,	“Fol. lanceol. obtus”	E. apiculata. 
Melicytus rancifls. 	“ebracteolate”	M. bracteolatus
Knightia excelsa,	“fol. glab.”		K. velutina
Entelea arborescens “fol. cord. angular”	E. orbiculata. 
Alectyon excelsum	“fol. integerrimis”	A. serratum
Carpodetus serratus, “fol. sup. puberula”	C. adpressa. 
Callixene parviflora leaves larger & 5-nervedC. trinerve. 
Elæocarpus Hinau	(“folus oblongis”	E. sinuatus. 
		 “flowers white, &c. 	E. viridulus. 
Cyathea dealbata,	“pinn. acuminate.”	C. caudata. 
Polypodium tenellum, “pinn. lance. acum.”	P. caudata. 
Hymenophm. scabrum  “pinn. acuminate”	H. elongatum
Lomaria montana, “stipes longer than frond  L. brevistipa
		& naked”, &c. 
Tmesipteris Forsteri, “small & narrow leaved”Tm. latifolia. 
Hymenoph. polyanthos  “Wholly glabrous,	H. villosum
                                        margins not ciliated.” 	
	“Rachis, petioles (& nerves) villous underneath, margins ciliated.”
Now, if in such plants I have only given you sub-varieties, or merely called your attention to certain natural chars. hitherto unnoticed, (although not a few of the foregoing had been recently published in the Ic. Plantm.) I do not look upon my labour as lost. I can assure you, that I never considered all I had so detected varying in differential chars. as so many different spn. And lastly, not a few of my sp. nov., you, after a rigid examination, have allowed to pass muster, merely giving them (after the manner of the various honorable services both at home & abroad,) a new jacket, or facings, – alias, a specific name. But it is all one to me, whether our chicks (plants) are called Jack, Tom, Will or Harry. –
I know the (said) diff. between affinity and analogy; ditto the (said) diff. between an essential & a differential char. – But, at the said time, I have ample evidence that really essential chars. are not yet known. I see such artificial bulwarks breaking down on every side: – Nature will not be bounded by our laws. And to the question, – What constitutes a really distinct genus – or, species? I cannot give a satisfactory answer. I know not of any certain rule; and I find the first Botanists of the day opposing one another in their speculations; while not a few are engaged in laboriously undoing what their predecessors or compeers have toiled to rear. Lindley gives an account of 3 genera of Orchids being found growing upon one spike! and truly enough remarks these upon “Such cases shake to the foundation all our ideas of the stability of genera & species, & prepare the mind for more startling discoveries than could have been otherwise anticipated.” (Veg. Kingdom. p.170) –
– But, to return: – In my speaking of the sp. of Phormia, you will please bear in mind, – that, perhaps, no person has seen more of them than myself, and that, too, in all situations throughout 20 years. Further, I have also taken the universal distinctive uses of the Plants into consideration, and no New Zealander would (or could) ever use one sp. for the other. I thus speak with especial reference to the 2 principal, and, to me, exceedingly well-defined) species, Nos. 4347 & 4533. –
I quite agree with you, that it would have been far better to have noticed habitat, &c, on the ticket of ea. specimen”, had I only given such information, but, in very many instances, I have made long remarks, much more than could have been written on a ticket. I regret, that you should not have found my Mss. to be of more service. I cannot but think that had your Bookbinder saved them together for you, (and, to this end, I always kept by me a little ruled paper, so that the Catalogue should be of one uniform size), you would have found the reference to the one book as greater labor than the referring to any others. You have, I think, certainly erred in not publishing the precise habitats of several of my plants – I mean, of those which you have only had from me – as, of all scarce, or novel, species. I very particularly mentioned their present, only known localities, in such a way too, – by correct spelling of the native names, – as would be of great service to any future collector. You have, it is true, excused your not doing so, by pleading, that, my habitats are not to be found in any Map or Gazetteer! It would indeed be a curious thing if the all but unknown hills, streams, and hamlets of this new country were to be found in any Map or Gazetteer; but, what say you to the habitats given in the Ic. Plantm., L. J. of Boty., or even the Brit. Flora? are one half of these to be found in any Map or Gazetteer? – As to the giving of “E. Coast” as a hab. for many Plants, it might just as well be left out, because several plants are peculiar to different parts (or ½ degrees of lat., if you will), of the E. Coast; I also think, E. Coast would have been better for between this place & Cook’s Str. 
You again tell me, my dear friend, that you “wish very much I could go to the S. parts of the Mid. Island & Botanize there”. I think I have, in some former letter, told you that I had always a desire to do so, but lacked time. Times, however, are altered with me! and I could now go, and (so far) the way is open but I want the means. And here, I may truly enough, echo your own words, “Time is” (or, must be,) “money to me”. If you, or Sir William, or both think, that I could in any way serve the cause of Science, & could procure me a suitable appointment of that nature, or, pay my expenses, or, pay for any plants (Dried or living,)  I might send you, so as to enable me in some decent way to fulfill your wishes, I am at your service. I would willingly accept an appointment of (say) £250 a year, or give a certain portion of the year – i.e. spring & summer, – at a less sum. – The principal obstacle would be the great want of laborers; 5s pr diem being paid here (!!) to a native, while 4 times the No. of our male & working native population might easily find employ at the above enormous wages. The only stipulation I should make would be – that I would not be under the direction & our provincial Government, mainly because the persons forming the same have no taste for such things; and I well recollect A. Cunn’s vivid narration (to me) of his being desired to grow Cabbages (!!!) for the parvenus of Port Jackson. –
I think I recollect saying, in my last letter, that my loss by fire exceeded £300. – I should rather have said 3 times that amount. It is only long after the horrible reality has passed, and you come to need a 100 things, and thus prove their use and loss, and have to purchase same again, at an advance of 200 pr ct., that you know & feel your situation. – And now, I think, I have fully remarked upon all that required noticing in your letter – excepting the Flor. N.Z., which I have purposely reserved till last. 
And first, let me tell you, that, while I am aware of the great difficulty attending the production of such a work as yours, increased as it is through your praiseworthily uniting the high & dry scientific with the low & popular style, I fear you will not have succeeded so as to please the majority of the present race of N.Z. Colonists. This, however, is no reflection upon the work, for I scarcely know what would please them. Had I obtained the 1st part soon after publication, and been nearer to you, I would have pointed out one thing, which (as far as pleasing the many here, & so increasing the sale of your work) would, I think, have been of service. Namely, the giving plates of the commoner timber trees & attractive plants, notwithstanding them having been already given in pubd. Botanl. Works, – of which, however, the many know nothing. On my receiving a parcel from you, containing circulars respecting yr work, but no letter, (which parcel was all broken to pieces, &, I have no doubt, part of the contents either abstracted or dropped by the way), I lost no time in sending the circulars to the nine respect. fathers of this District. It so happened, that the parcel reached me much about the same time that the 2 first parts of the work arr., that I was enabled to shew these specimens of the work to those who called: – all looked for the trees & shrubs they knew, and seemed disappd. at not meetg. with any – save, Metrosideros robusta, & “Brachyglottis repanda” – exclaiming, (as they scrutinized the plates,) “Why there is only the little weeds!”. At the same time, however, admiring the nobler Alpine Plants, – such as Ranunculus insignis, Olearia Colensoi, Celmisia holosericea & spectabilis, &c., – and highly complimenting the zeal & patience of the talented author. I gained but one subscriber; for whose copy I last year wrote to Reeves, through my Londn. Agents. I think, however, that there will be a sale of the work by & bye, when the retired “Millionaires” come this way from the hotter climates & the “diggings”. I hope to find that you have given some of the Coniferous & Taxaceous Plants, – but, after all, you may not be anything the richer through the No. sold. Some curious remarks were also made in going over the work, – e.g. “Senecio Greyii!”  pshaw – & at the suggestion too of Sinclair!! – why Sinclair was never at Cape Palliser. (You must know, that the ex-Governor was very unpopular in this district, and Dr S., who has been but very recently ousted, is said to be generally so). Several of the settlers had noticed this pretty plant growing on the dark rocks nr. the Cape where its elegant white leaves betrays it: – and then would follow a few critiques upon certain wrongly spelled, Native words, which from their being in the vulgar tongue, more readily caught their eye. The wrong spelling, (of which there are but few examples) must have happened through your not closely attending to my Mss. I will now proceed to remark very briefly upon a few things I have already noticed in these two first parts. 
Clematis depauperata, is without doubt, a truly distinct & curious sp., – Ranunculus multiscapus, var., is, I think, a good sp. – Drimys, – I see that Raoul also made a 2nd N.Z. sp. of this genus, D. colorata, which I suppose to be identical with my D. melalepos, No. 2473, or rather, D. microphylla, mihi, the leaves of which are bi-colored, at all events I cannot reconcile the Northern & Southern species (or states) of this plant. Melicytus –––, a species (“No. 7, E. Cape:” – vide, “Journal” printed by Sir Wm.) having leaves 10 inches long, unnoticed. – Under Pittosporum crassifolium you have at least 2 sp. Both P. crassm., & umbellm. are peculiarly Northern plants, and not seen by me S. of the Thames. I cannot comprehend where you have placed P. velutinum, mihi, – Nos. 206, 304 & 3848. This sp. is quite distinct from P. crassifm. The error (or confusion) of tickets of “P. viride, et P. uniflorum”, is most unaccountable. They are Distinct. P. viride well deserved its trivial name from being the only really & wholly green sp. in N.Z. The leaves of all our sp. fade much in drying. Hoheria populnea, I cannot but lament your uniting αβγδ: H. populnea, is most peculiarly Northern; often growing densely in thickets, or skirts of woods  where it is the principal plant. H. Lyallii (or one very similar,) I sent you in 1846, from Wairarapa: – vide my letter to Sir William of July of that year, in which I pointed out the greater No. of its styles. – Aristotelia fruiticosa, αβγδ, certainly 2, or more sp. – 
Coriaria, we have more than 2 sp. & no mistake! 
Corynocarpus “Fruit an oblong purple berry nearly an inch long”! – The fruit is from yellow to orange, and 2 inches long. Forster’s drawing (Gen. plant, tab. 16, fig m.,) is really horrible; hence it bears a most unfortunate gen. name. I fear, that I have never sent you any ripe fruit, which I will be sure to do next season; Forster, evidently, could not have seen any mature fruit. Clianthus, of which we have 2 good sp., and both now well-known to the settlers. But really I do not understand either your gen. or sp. char. – You say (in Lat. & Eng.) – “Vexillum as long as the keel”(!!) then, (Lat.) “Alæ, – carina breviores” (Eng.) “Wings twice as long as the standard (or keel)!”  I gave you a good sp. char. (wings obtuse, &c. &c.) with my new sp. vide, under, No. 1455. Mss. The settlers have also distinguished the difference, which is very apparent, some ask me for seeds of the Bay of Islands sp. and some for those of “my” plant, as they term it (i.e. the southern one). The Northern one does not flourish well here, & is smaller in every part than the Southern sp., – this I have now flourishing in my garden, 7 feet & more high. I have fruit for you. I do not recollect whether under that No. (1455) I also pointed out the bibracteolated pedicels of this sp., besides the one large bract at the base. –  Carmichælia nana, (mihi), which I have subsequently sent you in fruit, will, I doubt not, prove a good sp. – Edwardsia, I cannot bring myself to believe in there being but one sp. of this genus; I know, however, that it is a most difficult subject. – On Rubus, I would make the same remark. I have no doubt myself of 4 sp., (although, I confess, I could never satisfactorily make out Cunns. 2 sp.,) – one of the 4 I have never (I think) sent you, from not finding it in fl.; this sp., is only found in woods, always grows low on the ground never rising into the trees, &c. Another, the aphyllous one, (which you have not even noticed!) is an elegant if curious object, & I fear I have not yet obtained this in fl. although I thought I had done so. – Future Botanists will doubtless make more sp. than 2 of our Leptosperma. I doubt if L. ericoides is anywhere S. There is a pubescent calyxed species, which grows between Bream Bay & Cape Rodney, not noticed by you; of which I sent a specimen (a scanty one I fear!) in one of my earliest lots. – Notwithstanding what both yourself & Endlicher say concerning Tetragonia, I firmly believe in 2 sp., (and here again I have use to aid me). The small-leaved smooth-fruited plant, has its berry (sarcocarps) filled with a carmine-colored juice, which is expressed & used as ink, this sp. is only found S. of the E. Cape. The true T. expansa, has much larger leaves & ugly dry hard fruit. Of Aciphylla I feel assured there are 2 good sp. The smaller one grows lower down than its ally. The youngest states of either plant are as easily distinguishable as its older ones; as ea. sp. preserves its size & color from first leaves. It is curious to observe them mingling, as it were, on their respective borders on the sub-alpine hills. There again, use lends her aid, from the large alpine sp., the New Zealanders formerly obtained (at much trouble) a fragrant oil, with which they annointed themselves. Anisotome rosæfolia, “caule subscandente”!! amazing! no more so than a gooseberry bush. By the way, would it not have been better to have referenced all the sp. nov. of Anisotome to the old & valid Gen. “Gingidium”? than vice versa. –
I cannot but think there is a Loranthus over looked. Viscum salicornioides I also detected on Leptospermum in the road from Paihia to the Waimate; about 20 miles S. of the Falls. 
Why is the only S. species of Alseuosmia, (No. 1877 &c.) always found with a plain leaf. – Celmisia, a peculiar little sp. seems to be missing here; C. exilis, mihi, No. 1003, &c – I have not a word more to say concerning the Cardamines, save that some of them are perennial (or triennial) & some annual. I had ever been very anxious to know the plant from which I got the great leaf I had sent your father in some of my earliest lots, & now I find it is a Botryodendron. That plant (or one leaf!) cost me many miles of rough walking year after year, & much toilsome searches along that uninhabited & rocky coast where I first found it. On coming here, I wrote to Dr T. to look out for it; telling him, that many years ago I had heard from a few natives, who had formerly lived on the “Poor Knights” Islets, that it grew plentifully there. And now, I find, that after all, you have only obtained an additional leaf! I have long been of opinion (partly from what I heard from the natives at the North,) that several peculiar plants are to be found on those Islets, as well as on some others lying off the E. Coast. – You are certainly mistaken in saying, (p. 78) the leaves of the young plants of Carpodetus serratus, are small very variable panduriform deeply sinuate &c., – those twiggy specimens to which you refer, are, without doubt, young states of a sp. of Trophis (or Epicarpurus,) of which I subsequently sent you better specimens. – I do not wonder at your suppressing several of A. Cunn’s species, in the Gen. Oxalis, Epilobium and Alseuosmia; for, I confess, I never could make them all out. I am not, however, quite prepared to join you in reducing all the yellow flowd. Oxales to species: no doubt, they plagued you not a little, still it seems too much like “cutting the knot”. Such, however, is perfectly consistent with your views of our N.Z. species. 
You have given A. Cunn., (whose memory shall ever be duly honored by me) credit for several plants he never saw living. i.e. Phebalium nudum, Corokia cotoneaster, &c; – of these indeed, he had specimens, but which I sent him. This, however, is of little consequence, only, as A.C. was known never to have gone S. of the Bay of Islands, it may mislead some future Botanist, causing him to marvel (and theorise) how soon such plants have vanished. Those plants were found in & nr. Bream Bay, on the E. Coast – I have mentioned how disappd. some of my visitors were in looking over the plates of yr work. And now I will myself add, that I too partook of a similar feeling – although not arising from the same source – i.e. the absence of Timber Trees &c., – but from (what I dared to consider) the too many plates of a single genus, seeing you were confined to a certain no., e.g. Ranunculus 4, Alseuosmia 3, Celmisia 4, Metrosid. 3. 
I thought, would it not have been better to have given 1 (or perhaps 2) sp. of a genus, & so not only have illus. more general, but also favored us with a table or two of some of our peculiarly N.Z. ones, – e.g. Forstera, Entelea, Carmichælia, Plagianthus, Melicope, Coprosma, Aciphylla &c. 
I am sure I ought long ago to have thanked you for yr. long & interesting letter of Apl. 29/52, (post mk? “June 16”) which arrived here in Jan/53 just barely in time for acknowledging in my last letter to yr. father. No doubt, I should have written to you before now, but the last year has been a most peculiar one to me – one in which my time & thoughts have been alas! occupied with matters the very antipodes of Bot. 
Not but that I very often had you in my mind, (as I must ever have,) and I also thought that my last lot of specimens must suffice for that season. – I have now again with renewed pleasure gone over that letter of yours (for perhaps the 10th time,) & having already written so much in this (some of which has, I see, reference to a portion of that letter.) I can not now notice any more – save, to tell you that I never received the former letter you therein speak of as having been “written to me since your marriage.” – & that I was greatly gratified in hearing of Bidwell’s having sent you an Exocarpus from N.Z., which genus I presume is not far from our genera Pimelea & Drapetes. Brown even speaks of its affinity with Santalum, to which gen. your father long ago referred A. Cunns. gen. nov. Mida, but Lindley in his Veg. Kingdm. (4 years later), I perceive, published Mida as a gen. prop. (so, indeed, he has Skinnera in the same wk.). By the bye did I ever tell you that Bidwell had told me, on his last visit to N.Z. that he had brought from N.S.W. a quantity of Seeds & had scattered them in suitable localities wherever he went! for which I blamed him. Poor fellow! he too is gone. But your mentiong. his finding a New Holland gen. here, brings forcibly the above to my recollection. Speaking of letters – Did you ever get a letter from me, dated “Feby. 3/52” – I cannot find any intimation of such ever having reached your hands. I suppose, that you duly forwarded to Ralfs the little parcel I sent him? I have never however heard of his having recd. it. Ditto, the Rats & Bat to Prof. Owen. Did you ever find the Scraps of Fossil Wood I have from time to time sent you, of any Service? – Ditto, the Zoological specimens? If I recollect aright you (a long while ago) informed me, that the Zoology of the Antarc. Voyage was then publishing, if so, I suppose it has been some time published. I have diligently looked over all modn. Book Catalogs. to find such an announcement but without success. I have greatly regretted the non-arrival of Raoul’s work, which you kindly tell me you had sent me. I now regret this anew, seeing you have referred so often to it, & to its plates. When you next write, let me know the price of Raoul’s book, &, also, the price of those plates pubd. by Hombr. & Jacq., to which you have often referred in the former vols. of yr. great work. 
About 3 years ago, I, in ordering some Books from my L. Agents, desired them to procure me any one of the 3 follo. works on Lichenes – “Fries’ Lichenog.”, or “Achar. Synop. Lich.”: or, “Ach. Licheny. Univers”; – and, in order to ensure the best & most useful, I directed them to apply at Kew for directions, enclosing an open note addd. to Sir W. Hooker. In about a year after I got the Books I wrote for, minus the wk. on Lichens, my agent says. – They had duly forwd. the note, and after waiting a conside. time, had also written to Kew for directions, but recd. no answer. I will still thank you to let them know (or, me,) which is the best & most useful work of the 3, – or, there may be a still more modern & complete one. 
I have been greatly grateful in the 2 last Nos. (recd. – i.e. 26, 27,) of the Ic. Plantn. in seeing some of our N.Z. genera among the novelties from Borneo. I also find (in No. 27,) that you have pubd. another N.Z. Leucopogon. Gunn’s Tasmanian plants (also pubd. in that vol.,) please me much. In short, there are many interesting things therein from the Borneo Rhododendrons to yr magnificent Himalayan Fungi. My mentioning Gunn’s plants reminds me to say that I cannot expect you to give me a copy of the V.D.L. portion of the Ant. Flora, perhaps you will allow me (by & bye) to get a copy through you from your Publisher at a cheap rate, otherwise I fear I shall not be able to obtain one. I sincerely hope that the V.D.L. Flora may prove the best paying portion of the whole wk. It ought to be considg. the wealth of that thriving Colony. 
I hope to find that you will not have omitted the Nos. of my crypts. – viz. of those which may have proved to be of service. I feel exceedgly. obliged to Sir William for kindly giving the Nos. of my N.Z. plants he has pubd. – indeed, so long back as 15 years ago, your honored father thus expressed himself in the L. J. Boty. – “The Botanist of the recent ant. voyage, Dr H., is preparing a Fl. N.Z., in which Mr C’s plants will be referred to according to their numbers.” For my own part I do not greatly care about the not giving the Nos. of my Phænog. plants, but I shall feel it sadly if those of the Cryptog. ones should also be omitted. – Speaking of Crypts. a curious circumstance occurred: – 
about 8-10 years ago I first observed a minute crypt. growg. between the 2 larger glasses of my spyglass; as I could not unscrew them I was obliged to allow it to remain nmolested down to the present, and now the glass is quite covered with its fine & elegant ramifications somewhat thus, 






 – but being greatly dimmed thereby, I was necessitated, last week, 
to send it to Wellington to get it cleaned. 
How zealously you (& other Botanists) have cut up Forster’s gen.! Mniarum, Gingidium, Brachyglottis, Shawia, Schefflera, Dicera, Ancistrum, Sheffieldia, Skinnera,!! – I dare say, by this, a whole dozen! Several of which had been pronounced valid & adopted by Brown & De Candolle. Little could the Botanists of his day have supposed that the plants of the Antipodes so collected & described under Royal Patronage & at Royal expense would thus be treated. Surely if any of Flora’s children ever bid fair to retain the names imposed by their discoverer these were the very ones: – but, sic transit gloria plantæ – immo auctores!! Apropos, it has often recurred to my mind to ask you, why Forster’s N.Z. plant – Thelymitra longifolia (upon which, I believe, he founded & pubd. the genus), should have its specific name subsequently altered to Forsteri?
I both suppose & hope that the Sp. Fil. of your father & Nereis Austral. of your friend Dr Harvey, are both being continued. I shall be a little disappd. if, in the last lot of Marine Alga, there should not prove to be anything for the Nereis, especially in the Corallineæ family. –
I just copy you a paragraph which I have very recently seen in one of our Papers – the “Nelson Examiner”, June 7/54: – “Mr Swainson has just arrd. here on his way to Wellgn. He has been engd. by the Government of Victoria & Tasmania, during the last 3 years in the investign. of the indigenous trees, &c., of which he has discovered many hundred species quite unknown to the Botl. world. His collections made during this long period are said to fill more than 30 packages; & that of indig. seeds. exceeds 600.” – I suppose this person to be Wm. Swainson the Naturalist, who for several years lived nr. Wellington. I should not be too ready to believe his statement, of “his having discovd. many hund. sp.,” &c. &c. From what I have heard of him, I believe, that he is superlatively fond of sounding forth his own fame, & that he knows next to nothing of N.Z. Boty. I have also heard that, “Mr S. is exceedingly ‘tight fisted’, it being next to impossible to get any good living or dead specimen from him, although he himself ‘may propose an exchg.’” This last, is, or was, Wellington gossip; – but perhaps you, or Sir William, may know him well. 
In the Collectg. Departt. I have literally done nothing since I last wrote; having made but one short journey (to Cape Turnagain) during the past 12 mths., – in which I only gathd. a very small Hydrocotyle, (perhaps a wee state of H. Americana) – a little diandrous Elatine? (perhaps E. Americana;) to which I was directed from reading yr observn. (in Fl. N.Z., in locn.,) that you had seen specimens from Cunn., only; – and flg. specimens of a Rumex, I had formerly sent you in leaf only – (No. 3799). I hope however to do a little more this summer; having determined to strain every nerve in order to spend a whole month (solus) in the unvisited Alpine glens; & as you know me to be a firm believer in the isolation of several of our N.Z. species, I yet hope to gain you some novelty. 
I have already spoken (p.16.) of my readiness to accept any suitable office. And in addition thereto, may tell you that for some time past I have been thinking upon getting out a little work on N.Z. Popular Botany, which if I do and have no situation, I shall attempt something after the plan of the Icones Plantarm. only perhaps with better refs on both sides of the pp. The plates I should get done in England, & having both a small ptg. press & type, and knowing sufficiently how to use them, execute the letter press here myself. I think that such a work, popularly written & issued in monthly parts would by-&-bye sell tolerably well. Before however that I enter upon it, I shall beat up for subscribers & fully count the cost. In the meanwhile you would oblige me in letting me know, the expense of such plates, as those of the Ic. Plantm. the cost for drawing on stone and the 2nd cost pr. 100, or pr 1000; – also, for coloring; – and whether any extra exp. is incurred should specimens be sent instead of drawings, &, if so, how much, and also the expense of ea. item, as above, when executed in impl. 8vo – size of Nereis. I venture to believe that should I commence such an undertaking, both Sir William & yourself would not object to my copying from your plates; but let me know fully. 
Some of my visitors have expressed a wish that I enter on a Dicty. of the N.Z. language – a standard one being still a desideratum; but this is a work both comp. & dry; though, to me, it would not be unpleasant. In such a work, however, I should like to have (what you have in yr Fl. Ant.,) Governt. aid, & not to be goaded. Another half planned (or, rather, long-thought of) work of mine, is that of a good History of N.Z., past & present; which is also a desideratum; as up to the present time we have not one really worth reading (none of ref.,) save what Cook has given us in his Journals. But such a work (as I have contemplated it) would be one of years; & not only so, but it would absolutely require my going to Engd. to finish & publish it; – besides, I could not do it unassisted. – And just now, I have every reason to suppose that the late Govn. Sir Geo. Grey will be again a Bookmaking. – Not a few of my visitors have urged me to commence the keeping of sheep upon the Crown Lands, (as many of themselves do & which soon becomes exceedingly lucrative,) but, the truth is I have no heart that way; and I plainly see – in the scarcity of laborers – that a sheep-owner to do well must either attend continually in person, or procure a trust-worthy overseer; – that personal attention I could not give; neither could I purchase a flock of sheep, – nor pay a proper person for looking after a small no; which indeed would be a dead loss certain for several years. It is not at all improbable yea quite possible & fully in keeping with our National character, that I may yet want Bread! – and, a generation or two hence – when all shall be known, the Australian lyre be resuscitated & retouched by some unborn Orpheus – have a monument erected to my memory!! –
I hope, my dear Doctor Hooker, that you will not be weary with this infliction of mine; for, certes, this long & anything but pleasing epistle must prove a tax upon both your time & patience. In it too, I fear, I have been saying greatly too much about myself. But pardon me this; as well as my not agreeing with you in all points about our N.Z. plants: have patience man! I may see with your eyes by & bye. I cannot, however, close without telling you how greatly I have been taken with the happy picture you have briefly sketched of your truly comfortable Domestic circle – reminding me not a little of some parts of Milton’s L’Allegro. – With a loved wife by your side ably assisting you in your pleasing professional duties, – a son riding on his father’s cane, or romping with a kitten, or looking archly up into his good grandpapa’s face, in full & staunch expectation of the usual orange or nuts – and an old school-fellow & Botanical travelling companion as a chum at your elbow, you must, I think, be very comfortably moored, & heartily sing “dulce dulce domum”. I have no fear of you now, again daring poor Franklin’s fate in ploughing Antarctic seas, or plodding through an Indian jungle in a tropical noon day’s sun on the back of an elephant. – I once thought, too sanguinely perhaps, that I too should be thus blest in a future Domestic circle, but fate was adverse & the gods have decreed otherwise. Still let me not repine; at all events not envy. – May you & yours, my dear friend, be ever mutual blessings! watering & watered as a clear & charming perennial mountain rill – and in so doing, you, I know will but follow in the wake of your honored father; – whom God bless & preserve. –
I have not said a syllable about the war: which is doubtless the all-engrossing subject with you nowadays. For, certainly there is no affinity between Flora & Bellona. I hope, however, that old Charley Napier will teach the Russian good manners in true John Bull style. Our last news is the Bombardt. of Odessa. Be assured that we all feel fraternally with you; & I cannot but think that this doubled Income Tax will give to all those who may have it to pay a regular out-&-out hearty grudge & zeal against the Great Northern Bear; as Jno. Bull generally resents it the most when his pocket is touched. Still, I do not like war; from principle; and I greatly fear that this one will prove both long & heavy. By the way, speaking of Napier, let me tell you that our new town (which has to be built here at Ahuriri) is called Napier and a new & good seedling apple of my own raising, I have also named after the old Boy. –
I suppose that you have been so literally overwhelmed with dried specimens of plants from N.Z. as to have had quite enough to supply all lovers of Botany. – Should, however, any be needed, perhaps I could furnish them. Are any of our Trees, or Seeds still wanting in the Royal Gardens? And could you inform me what Plants are desirable among the first Horticulturists. 
And now I must conclude: pray remember me most kindly to your good Father, who, I hope, is quite well. And if you please, make my best respects to your amiable lady, and be sure to give a round dozen of “Father’s Kisses” to your dear boy – and the friendly salutations of an out-and-out lover of Botany to your friend, Dr Thompson, whose name & zeal & success the Londn. Journal of Botany has long ago made familiar to my ears and eyes, –
	On behalf and in stead of
	Yours ever most affectionately
			William Colenso. 

Are you aware of 2 genera named Colobanthus? Lindl. has published 2: – 1, a Grass (between Aira & Avena,) Trinius; and 1, as yours, giving however Bartling as its founder – Vid. Veg. Kgn., pp. 116, & 498. – but only once in index. –


P.S. My having mentioned Sir Geo. Grey’s name renews a desire I have sometime had of receiving some such appointment as that of “Resident Magistrate”; an office which he created & which is exceedingly useful when properly filled – but to which the appointment must come from the Queen. The situation is only £200. a year, but it is one somewhat easy and of great importance. The office was created for the summary arranging of matters between the Colonists & Natives. The Resdt. Mag. has a double power, alone he can settle what ordinarily requires 2 Justices of the Peace, & further, even the lower felonious cases; which 2 Justices could not adjudicate upon – he can. Now, properly speaking, a man to fill this responsible situation should both well know the Native tongue & character, unfortunately however such is not ordinarily the case and, as a matter of course, both sides differ. Fortunately for us our present Rest. Mag. here (the late Col Secy., Mr Domett,) is a clear-headed well informed pains-taking man, (although unfortunately he is lame,) – he also holds the situation of Land Commissioner, which gives him another £200 pr. ann., otherwise he would not I think remain here for a paltry £200., just the hire now of warehousemen. If I could get one such appointment as that of Resident Magistrate, or, of what I have been lately advocating – an Itinerating one, for the most speedy settlement of Native disputes, (seeing the poor souls come at monstrous inconvenience in troops of scores from a long distance whenever there is a case among themselves which they may consider to be of importance) – then I should be more at ease with reference to the future, – keep my position in Society, – & have a little spare time for Botanizing, &c, for myself & English friends, not forgetting the Royal Gardens. Still, I should not like to have to reside out of this District, (from Cook’s Strait to Table Cape,) at least not upon such a Salary. If the late Earl of Derby, who condescended to write me such long & gracious letters, was still alive, I would have made an appeal to him before now. – For, I cannot but firmly believe, that it never can be right that I who have so long & so heavily labored in almost every public line for this my adopted Land should at last want Bread in it. – W.C. 


P.S. (2nd) – I will thank you to let me know of some honest Botanl. Bookseller (or, in fact, any such Bookseller – first, or second-hand) one whom you can confide in, i.e. for a good article at Reasonable prices. For years I have been used to the getting Books at “Trade Price”, – and my Londn. Agents would (I think) rather have any other order than Books. 

Sept. 25/54. P.S. (3rd) – At length I proceed to despatch my letter. I have delayed doing so – partly because having written you so much worthless matter, and the Postal Regulations this side of the water not allowing of any prepaying, (which, however you must do) I waited until I should again write to my Londn. Agents, to whom I enclose this. 
In p.20 I have remarked on your error in Clianthus – “vexm. as long as the keel”… I am now daily contemplating more than a 1000 expanded flowers of my 2nd sp (in my garden) in all which the keel is from 5/12 to 8/12 longer than the vexm. It is true that during estivation the vexillum is vexillary-reclinate (if I may so speak) and just as long as the carina; but, afterwards, all the lower parts grow rapidly larger, and on measuring an expanded flower (during its prime & before it is beginning to fade), it will be found to be as above. 
	Adieu my dear friend,
		Vale valegæ
			Wm Colenso. 
 # 


23 February 1855
Waitangi, Hawke’s Bay
 N. Zealand, Feby 23/55. 
My dear Dr Hooker
	As I find it to be just 5 months since I despatched my last long epistle to you, (dated Aug/54,) so I think it quite reasonable to suppose that ere this it must have reached your hands. And, as I am again writing to my London Agents (to whom I enclosed my last,) I cannot make up my mind to omit writing to you which (as I have scarcely a sentence worthy of being written) must be done purely upon the account of auld lang syne. – so therefore, be doubly prepared to exercise Charity. 
	If you have received my last letter you will have known my thoughts respecting a visit to the Mid Island. Strange to say, an offer quite in accordance with my wishes, has already been made me, but, coming so very unexpectedly as it did & demanding instant compliance, not forgetting my sworn fealty to you & your father, I withstood all solicitations, and returned a direct refusal. The circumstance was this: about a week before Xmas I was surprised by the sudden arrival from an unbooked visitor – a “Doctor” or “Chevalier Smith” – a foreigner (a German, I presume,) who came here overland from Auckland en route to Wellington – where his suite (he said) was. He only spent a night with me (in my hermitage) – arriving at vi. p.m. and leaving the next morn. at viii – which night however we contrived to make the most of, spending it (much as you & I would do) in looking over such specimens as were at hand, & in talking about Botany & its kindred sciences, taking only about 1½ hours sleep. Dr S was greatly pressed for time, having engaged to be at Wellington by the 29th of that mo. He was then (he told me) going to explore the Mid. Island. He repeatedly urged me to accompany him, tempting me with a large salary, &c., but I could not anyhow leave here at a moment’s notice. He appears to be in the employ of more than one Govern. but of his employers, I know nothing – only he assured me that he did not want money &c. He greatly wished me to sell many of my specimens, and urged me to put myself in correspondence with some rich & scientific individuals on the Continent, all of which, I for the time (at least) have declined. He assured me that after spending the summer in the Mid. Island, he should return to these parts, when we are to go to the neighbouring mountn. range together.
He seems to be more of a Geologist than Botanist: – but, truly, we were together for so very brief a time, and his understanding so very little English, & speaking less, and my (now) knowing nothing of French, that I ought not to pass an opinion upon him. I lent him however, at his earnest desire, 7 of my old & best N.Z. sketches which he was to have returned ere this from Wellington, but they are not yet to hand. 
	In your letter (received, dated “Jany. 6/54”) you speak of some Books being there ready to be sent. Soon after that period my London Agents were engaged in packing & forwarding goods to me (which left England in June/54,) and in an accompanying letter, they say that they had informed my friends at Kew & elsewhere, but had not received anything. I confess I was doubly disapptd. in finding nothing. I had even ordered through them for one of the Magistrates of this District, a copy of the N.Z. Flora, which, too, they had omitted to send. And now, within the last few days I have received another shipment from them sent off in September – and not a fragment of any Book!!. 
	I am, (I think) mo. unfort. in getting Books from England. I hope, however, that there are some now on their way. 
	In looking the other day over my entries (Entomological works: for descriptions of certain Hemipterous genera) believing that I had discovd. – though not now for the first time – a species of Coccus, I happened to stumble upon a Lepidopterous genus of Illiger, named Eurybia: which is identical (in name) with Cassini’s genus, to which you have referred so many of our N.Z. Compositæ – not to say genera – Brachyglottis & Shawia. It is certainly most undesirable that 2, or more, genera in the great natural kingdoms should bear the same generic name. And, as I believe the rule to be to alter such upon their being detected, I now make it known to you, (supposing you to be ignorant thereof), that you may be first to alter it. At the same time, I confess, I do not know which genus was first established. You will find Illiger’s genus mentioned in the Ency. Britann. vii. ed., act. Entomology; and a figure given of a species, in one of the plates of that volume. –
	We have very recently been again visited by shocks of earthquakes and even now are scarcely free; twice or three weekly from the 23rd Jan. down to date, being about the average. The first shock of this recent series (which occurred after ix. p.m. on the 23rd ulto.) was a very severe one, and sent us all a-spinning! (You, perhaps might be able to compare it to grounding on a floe or berg – or even to your perilous gale in the pack, from which you had such a miraculous escape,) I was, as usual at that hour, in my little study sitting quietly reading, when the first shock came. Instinctively following my unvarying practice, I rushed out, and it was most providential that I did so, or perhaps I should not now be writing, as it was, I had to get round the table at which I was sitting, and open 2 doors of the reeling & creaking house. The instant I sprang out, down came all my books – 4,500 vols. – shelves & all! together with several other matters which happened to be “stowed away overhead” – (such as, Boxes of specimens, a portable writing desk, oak case of Pistols, jars, Bottles, &c, &c) – these all came “down with a will”! and with a terrible crash. – I really thought the chimney had come down. Meanwhile I was now on the outside, holding on to mother Earth, earnestly viewing the scene which was awfully grand without however admiring it. I have perceived many shocks, and am not (I think) quite destitute of either natural or moral courage; but, I must candidly confess that both to admire & to feel at ease during nature’s throes is beyond my present ability. The earth moved up & down irregularly – joltingly, or curvetting if you will, not altogether unlike that retrograde uneasy motion a person feels on board a steamer, (that is, the Steamers of ‘33-’34, – they may have been wondrously improved since), only and of course, of so many extra myriads of horse power!
	I was alone. The tall weeping willows with which I was surrounded threw their long draping branches about in an imploring frantic way – now lashing the earth, and now sweeping the sky, from which the swimming stars most erratically careering about, looked brightly down, reminding me of a deck scene in a pitching ship during a clear night on the tropical ocean; – the post-and-rail fences too, which were very dry, joined in with their unnatural notes, & creaked & clattered prodigiously. While the neighbouring rivers (2, Waitangi & Ngaruroro) and sea, resurged in a superlatively angry mood, instantaneously rising & falling several feet – apparently in as real, if not as great, a chafe as ever the classical Scamander of Simois were when enraged at Peleus’ God-like son. And last, not least, a stream of pale lambent fire glided along, only a very few feet from me, accompanied by successive reports as of a distant feu-de-joie. The fire was very peculiar: in it, and through it I could plainly see the trunks of the apple trees in the garden; the sheet, or body of flame, did not rise higher than 3, 4 feet from the ground, and its edges were blue & ragged (flame pointed); it momentarily affected my sight, for a few seconds after it had passed, I was in total darkness and I began to fear that my eyes had received serious injury. By-and-bye dame Earth becoming again tranquil after her strange reel, I ventured into my hut, cautiously groping my way, my candle having been extinguished during the shock; after a few long minutes of ghostly trepidation I succeeded in laying hold of a Box of Lucifers, and soon saw how horribly my whole colony of muses – Arts, Sciences & Celestials – had been routed and thrown hors de combat by the infernals. The table & chair which I had so recently left, was sent smack into the chimney: a Portable desk, Reeves 2 guinea box of colors – & some stout china jars, &c, completely smashed up: while the larger & heavier of the 2 Book cases had come down entire with its 7 tiers of Books (from the Encyclop. Britanni. to the little pocket Horace), without one of them having been started from its place! falling as it were in one piece – as we have seen Mountebank & other actors throw themselves most unarthritically flat on the stage. Another curious circumstance, which revealed (if I may so say) the torsion of the shock, was displayed in a large & heavy single shelf – a kauri board, 6 feet by 1 foot, and 1½ in. thick – which had been fixed transversely over the door through which I had so lately passed, this board was both thrown down and out (longitudinally) 4 feet into the outer room! in the very contrary direction to that in which the other shelves &c., had fallen. This unique feature still exercises my thinking powers; and it serves to convince me more & more of the truth of my old opinion, viz., that while we almost invariably speak of shocks proceeding E. & W., or N. & S. (as the case may be) more or less of a gyrating power accompanies shocks in general. 
	From Wellington papers just to hand. I gather that the shock of the 23rd ult., has been pretty generally felt in the Colony – from Auckland N. to Canterbury S, perhaps farther – but so far certain. Unfortunate Wellington has had, as usual, a superlatively heavy shock, only one person, however, killed, which appears almost wonderful. Nearly all the Brickwork of the Town is again down, and some of the folks are rather dampish in consequence, and talked of leaving. No doubt these frequent earthquakes will prove a heavy clog upon the neck of this aspiring Colony. 
A number of the Nelson Examiner (Cook’s Straits Paper) of Jany. 6/55, now before me, contains an account of a “Journey from the head of the Pelorus (River) to the Wairau Plains, by Mr Blackney”, having annexed a “Summary of the remarks of Dr Joliffe on the Botany &c., of that estuary”. Both gentlemen I presume belong to H.M.S. “Pandora”. The Doctor’s Botanl. list seems to contain but little novelty. He says – “The Nikau palm (Areca sapida) was found in abundance and great size, being about 180 miles further S. than is mentioned in Dr Hooker’s Flora N.Z. – upward of 90 kinds of Ferns & Club mosses, and all, excepting about 6 species are common to both the Mid. & Northern Islands. Of Mosses, Jungermanniæ, Liverworts & Lichens more than 140 kinds were collected, the greater No. of them being found in the N. Island.” He also gives a list (Native names) of Trees & shrubs: – all common. The Pandora is expected here shortly to survey; if I gain the Doctors’ acquaintance, I will know his ferns &c, and report, but doubtless his collections will come under your eye. –

(March 14th)  I must now close. But I have a bit of (I hope), good news to tell you. Only this day in returning from the Harbour (Ahuriri) I stepped aside into a marsh to look for, Lobelia perpusilla, in fruit. Having but a few minutes to spare, I did not find it, but, to my great joy, I discovered a (to me) new monopetalous plant, with a large personate corolla – no doubt of Scrophularinæ, and perhaps a species of Mimulus, as it agrees pretty well with Brown’s descript., (Prodr.) with which I have now compared it. My only having one fully expanded flower (which I shall include in this note with a yg. fruit,) prevented my close anas. It only rises to 5-9 inches and is rather succulent. I shall get you some good specimens next week, with every hope that it may prove to be a novelty even to you. –
And now, once more A Dieu!
	Believe me. 
		My dear Dr Hooker,
		Yours most sincerely. 
			W. Colenso. 
 # 	


13 September 1862
Wellington, NZ. 
Sept. 13/62
Dear Dr Hooker
After a long lapse. of time – I find myself impelled to write to you a few lines for this Mail which leaves today. I have been here in the town nearly 3 months, attending to Public duties during which our mutual friend Dr Knight and myself have been “chums” occupying one cabin (much like you & your chum did on board the ‘“Erebus”). A few days ago, I was happy in supporting a motion in the House for £500 for a Manual of N.Z. Botany to be executed by you. We had previously talked it over among a few of us, Members, so that in bringing it forward, we had secured support. I was for going in for a little more, as I wished to see a full flora (Algæ included) – but what with more expenses & heavy loans we have, perhaps gone as deep as we could. However, I have had great pleasure in signing with Dr. Mantell, Dr. Monro, Dr. Knight, and a few others, an agreement for £100 to be raised by us to complete the Manual, if required. 
During this long hiatus in our correspondence, I have often heard of you, & always heartily wished you success. My path has been (still) a hard-working one but I am happy in working – albeit utile not dulce – as a matter of course. I have had, & still have, a plenty of old enemies, from among a party who ought to have known better. –
I have, I think, a few wee floral novelties: – such they were to me; one a small fern – I will look them up & send them, but I have really done nothing in Botany for years. As a proof of how much I have had you in mind – & how much I still respect & ever shall respect you – it honours our Science – I may tell you that in the town of Napier, Hawkes Bay, where I reside – being of that Province, Provincial measurer & Member in our Ho. of Representatives, – in laying out a piece of ground I have nearly in the centre of the said Town. I have named the two streets of the same, “Banks Street”, “Hooker Terrace.” The neighbouring streets are Owen - Faraday – Milton – Goldsmith – Shakespeare – Chaucer – Carlyle – Hastings - &c, &c so you are in good company. 
I hope you are very well and doing well – in every sense. If, in getting out the Manual for us, you could give the Nos. of the plants I sent you (especially on the Crypts. or any of them) much like you did Gunn’s – you would confer a great favor. For I had promised specimens – which promise I have never fulfilled, through want, in the main, of time to examine and compare w. your Flora N.Z. (but wh. prom. I should have fulfilled had the Nos. been given.)
Believe me, ever, Yours
		W. Colenso
 # 


8 June 1863
Napier, N.Z. 
June 8/63
My dear Hooker 
Your prized and welcome letter of Jany 3. I duly recd. and most heartily do thank you for it. Your handwriting recalls a 1000 sweet flowery associations of one’s past days – just as a Himalayan or Falklands plant of your own gathering must do to you. – I should have written to you by the last mail – but the truth is that, immy. on receipt of yours, I wrote to Knight asking him if he was about to send you any specimens from the Capital – as, if so, I would lose no time in sending him the few I have to go with them. 
	Well, he immy. replied, saying he would write fully by next mail – & now (yesty.) that mail str. (which takes this) has arrived and not a line from K!! I have a few spns. for you – which are novel to me: one is a Fern, closely bordering on Asplen. Trichomanes if not identical. But I have really done nothing for years – when I might have done a great deal. – By next mail I hope to send you a small packet. – I am now entirely free, having resigned my Govt. off. as Prov. Treasurer & Inspr. of Schools £300 pr. ann. through the precious Scotch clique with wh. our Province is infected. You, too, have known a little of their organized bigotry: – I purpose going about in the approaching spring after a few orchids, &c, – my priv. resources are not strong enough to enable me to wander far from home: –
	The Middle & Southern Island & Chatham’s (I saw when at Wellgtn. last yr. some Chatham Isld. plants, wh. had been brought over – a Coprosma, Dracophyllum, & an Acæna) – are where I should like to lie a-gleaning, also mount Egmont, and I will yet try again after a small scrap of aid from Govt. I am sure Knight could get me a little aid if he wod. exert himself – (entre nous). 
I am glad to hear so very good an acct. of yourself as you have given – also of yr. respected father’s good health. – If you have a copy of yr paper for the Linnæan Jl., contg. Haast’s Travers’ Sinclair’s & my “Ourisia” – & could send it me I should thank you – further. –––
I am obliged to write now in a hurry, as the Str. is off – but will write you very fully by next mail. Hope you will acknowledge my Dianthus australis – am quite sure it is a true & distinct sp. – and, as I said before, is known as such to the Settlers & Gardeners. I have long had fruiting specimens in pickle for you. 
By the way I will be obliged to you if you will get one of your Kew Garden folks to let me know, –
1.	What N.Z. plants are desiderata for Kew Gardens. 
2.	What N.Z. Ferns are still scarce & val. in England? –
I had heard from Knight (& had seen notices in Papers) of yr & Bentham’s Gen. Pl. and felt much interested. – I assure you, that you have good friends in our Ho. of Reps. – men, whom I had thought had no feeling whatever for the dulce came out readily in support of both our proposals. – Mantell ought to do a good deal for Science. –
	Excuse this & believe me
		Ever faithy. Yours. 
			Wm Colenso


For 2-3 months past I have had a peculiar affn. of right hand – scarcely write at times. 
 # 


26 October 1863
Auckland, N.Z. 	
	October 26, 1863. 
My dear Hooker
I arrived here last week to attend Party duties (what other duty I may have to perform while a denizen of our planet I can scarcely imagine – at all events you will readily enough believe me to be pretty well “up” in many Colonial or Bush matters by this – nearly 30 years of expatriation from Old England). We are adjourned for a few days, until the Southern laggards come up, much to the vexation of the boys who had retd. first to School. – They say that we are to have a hot & tough Session. For my part, I would that many influential men would (if they could) leave off party politics, & viewing things thro blue glasses – and, at least, join until the Maories are licked well, and put into their proper position. It is really harrowing here, just now, – the daily murders – of quiet old men, wom. & children, by straggling savages within a few miles, – who dare not shew themselves for a fair fight. Hitherto our General has not acted on the off. – it is said that he is half mad at the delay in sending the gun-boats to the Waikato. However the one wanted, entered yesterday. Politics, Hooker, are not my forte. Still I try to do my bit as we learned in our Catechism, “to do my duty in the place God may call me”. For what I know, you too had learned to “hand reef & steer in an emergency in your school. of circumnavigation, – I often go over – again and again the (words obscured).
Farewell Politics, for this note. I enclose a scrap of a fine plant from Chatham Islands – which I have known by report (local) for years & which I have growing in my garden at Napier. I gathered this for you just before I came today and will send you a better sps. by & bye. Of course if you have such, this will be valueless. I wish much to see the fruit (wh. I have left strict orders to have saved) and believe it will rank under Boraginaceæ – only it has smooth & shining leaves. It will prove an accession to your English gardens – plant, being 2 feet diameter, or more (herbaceous) – at first sight reminding one of our large Ourisia: leaf (like a young Rhubarb) 9in broad 8in long, cordate, retuse, glabrous, shining 9-nerved (as the common plantain) – flowering scape in semi-whorls, 2-3 feet long – flowers beautiful blue, quite striking. 
When in 1858, I offered my services to the Ministry of the day to explore the middle Island, or the unknown centres of this Island – they refused them, although I only required from them £40 (forty pounds) pr. ann. to provide clothing, they paying shipping expenses, &c., when needed – That’s passed – but my mind often reverts to it: and then I had not the private means to go “on my own hook”. I am (at home) doing much for you (or Berkely) in the smaller Crypts. – of wh. I am sure (espy. in Fungi) there is still large store: but, I am pretty sure that the last lot of small Crypts. (fresh water algæ & some curious things from the heights) which I sent you are not in yr N.Z. Flora – no doubt they came too late. 
After we had (for the time) ceased to correspond – I (for my limited means) spent a good deal of money in Botl. works – at one time I sent Pamplin £25 and at another, I sent Babington £20 – (and about £10 or £15., at times to my old London Agents for Botl. Books, and I must say I have been signally disappointed – particularly by Pamplin – who sent me a lot of old trash at high prices, instead of the Books I had ordered & wished. – From him, & from my Agents, I had several Parts of the Sp. Filicum, I think I can give you herein the last part (I find I cannot now do this). I have also Moore’s Index Fil. I should much like to get a copy of what you may have pubd. in the Linn. trans. or Journal, of our N.Z. plants. – I intend, while here, to have a good out & out chat w. Knight I hope [entre nous, the old gentleman is not at all jealous of me. I mean of my publishing a little work on the N.Z. ferns – with plates of species, & varieties (much like your Icones Plantarum) – he had some thoughts that way – or rather of genera only, – but I wish him to keep to the mosses & smaller Lichens, as he is a (words obscured) now both time & a house – but I need a good (or decent) Lithog. artist, and already since I have been here I have been speaking to one who professes to be able – but I fear he will not prove a 2nd Fitch. I have no office of any kind now. I wish I had – i.e. something suitable, as without going in to my little capital (of savings) I have not quan. suff. to live respectably in Napier. I have had an idea of applying for the two unfilled professorships at Nelson College – Botany, & the N.Z. language – but I fear to have too many Masters: – whom it is hard to please. By the way, I may as well tell you (speaking of N. College & our talk at Wellington last session on Botany. &c reminds me of it,) – it has more than once been whispered in my hearing that your good Linn. Society ought to have made me a member, or Ass. – seeing I have worked so hard in the cause of science, and (perhaps) the only (words obscured) at his own expense – to say nothing of the best Herbarium, & best Botanl. Library in the Colony. As you & your esteemed Father are high officers there – if you think well of it, I should feel obliged if you could manage it. 
	– I am very sure that we have another Drosera – the one that grows among the fern in H. Bay is not the same as the one found in similar situations at the North – D. auriculata. I have specimens for you at Napier. Its petals & sepals are alike very blunt retuse & ragged, broadest at top, dilated – much like the labellum of Cyrtostylis (of wh. by the way I think I have yet another sp.) – the leaves also are different. I have a vague recollection of having – some years ago, in my voluminous scribbling – pointed out to you the diff. – I hope to send you a little packet of sundry sps. – next year – to be in time (if you will) for an Appendix to your Manual: – 2nd vol. ––
	I brought up several Books for Knight – Genera. Filicum, Index Fil. (Moore’s) – Hassal’s F. water algæ – Tuckerman’s Synopsis N. A. Lichen – DeLise’ Stictæ, &c. – and the Antarctic Cryptogy. – And, while here (stray moments). I am going in for the Dr’s Grevilles Sc. Crypt. 
	I don’t expect any answr. to this. Your time my good fellow is very much too valuable. Believe me, I wish you well in every possible shape & way, and will aid & assist you in every way I can to the utmost. I shall with pleasure (as I told K. yesterday) support a vote for an extra sum for the Manual in the Ho. – or, if such should be refused, (it may), I am prepared to subscribe money, in conjunction with others, to make up the sum required tho’ as for money – many of the Members & very many of the settlers (rich parvenus of this prov. in particular) could buy me 1000 times over. Never was rich in money – never sought or cared to be for myself – and never shall be. A Dieu
		Your ever faithful
		(words obscured).
 # 


7 December 1863
Ho. of Represens. 
Auckland, N. Zealand. 
	Decr. 7 1863
Dear Hooker
	Just 5 words in the midst of business – mail closing – to let you know – 1. that I very often think of you & your work. 2. that, 3 days ago I had the pleasure of voting in favor of another £100 toward the N.Z. Bot. Manual. (I think I must have told you that last year at Wellington, several of us, I among them – subscribed in case of penalty £100 in addition to the £500. then voted for the Manual). This £100 is now voted for you by the House of our representation of its being required & so relieve us: – (or, in one sense – very certain too – I might have more truly said relieve me as I am the only pecuniarily poor fellow of the lot! yet, I would not exchange w. the wealthiest sons of Crœsus among them) –. 
	Sir G. Grey has had some Botanical conversation w. me. He wished me to go on w. Boty. of N.Z. I told him I needed a Macænas. He has promised his support. But I want more than that, i.e. some small certainty for the future. I offered him my literary (!!) services, (& still remain in my own ho. at Hawkes Bay,) for £100 a yr. certain. I wished to be engaged on the Maori Lexicon – taking in cognate Polynesian dialects, which have been my study for a few years. Sir George promised me everything – but my old political foes, the Fox Ministry, are now in, & they have no generosity & less real love of the dulce or beautiful in their composition. I wonder the elements out of which such souls arise: Sulphur or carbon, or something worse. But I shall see Grey again. Had Prince Albert lived I would have written to him; if I knew French I would have written (or write) to L. Napoleon. However, my good fellow, tell me (as early (& briefly, if you must), as you can) – what Fitch would execute Plates of the Ferns for – say royal 8vo. What for plate on stone – from specimens – what printing, at per hundred, what for 500 – for 1000 – for 2000, and also what per 100 for coloring. What the folks here want, is, all the habitats in the provinces and all the local information and the varieties, &c. &c. &c. – of course the money would be pd in London & issued safely. 
I have seen, since I have been here, a specimen (broken) of Nephrolepis gathered in N. Zealand near or in the Rotorua district (Central) – & I believe Hochstetter got specimens. It must be at least 2 feet long, very much at first sight like the specimens (barren) of Lomaria rotundifolia (I forget your new name) – and very near to (if not the same as) an Australian Nephrolepis – of which I have seen spns. here – but no time to ex. & no glass w. me. 
I have also seen another Trichomanes strictun probably N.Z. for 1st time & if it be that plant, it is found in back woods at Wangarei, Bream Bay, E. Coast – but I shall see again by & bye. –
I now see, more than I did, the benefits of my becoming a Memb. or Ass. or something of the Lin. or Geolog. Soc. I am sure – from what I have heard – that had I done 1/10 of what I have for my nat. land for any of the for. countries – I should long ago have had a whole necklace of pearls. I myself don’t want any such – but there are other eyes & thoughts. 
As to our Maori war: the Maori have been taught a lesson at Rangiriri – that the Briton can die as well as fight. 4 times they hurled themselves on the impregnable hill, & 4 times were they repulsed – night came on (as of old w. Homers & Ossiam’s foes) – & by morning light the “forlorn hope” – told off & ready, burning for revenge for the many officers & men fallen – were thirsting to renew the fight – when the white flag of the Maori within shewed. 
Much has been said of their gallantry (i.e. Maoris), I doubt it. It was the sheer desperation of an animal at bay – Cat, Rat, or Deer – they knew the murders they had committed, and the exasperated feelings of the settlers – they knew that in their own Maori wars they never shewed quarter in storming a “pah”. – they knew that W. Thompson had stolen away in the night to raise troops & make an onslaught on our flank or rear by morning, hence they fought & were wonderfully surprised by grey dawn to find our men for the 5th time thundering at their gate & determined to enter. The general made a mistake (pardonable enough) in his reconnaissance. A Parapet of solid earth work was supposed to be 12 feet high – it was 21 feet – 9 of which was from the bottom of a ditch – 10-12 feet wide!!
	Adieu! Believe me my good fellow. 
		Ever & always Yours. 
			Wm. Colenso. 
 # 


9 April 1864
Napier, April 9, 1864. 
My dear Hooker
Many thanks for your kind remembrance of (well no date – I see you have said “I have written to you only today” which letter had not turned up,) but some time in Jany. Let me again assure you that I do not expect you to reply to my notes – you have too much to do & your time is vastly too precious. 
Now then, I am glad to find you working at the “Manual”, &c. and shall look forward with a deal of pleasurable expectation as to the fine Borag. plant (Myosotidium nobile) – I had supposed you must have had it long ago. – By the way I should like much by-and-bye to visit the Chatham Islands (where you & Ross should have spent 2 or 3 days) as I think there are several Botl. treasures there: if you or your friend correspd. with Sir G. Grey, would you just mention it. I have to conversn. but Sir G. has much to attend to just now. 
I am really sorry you have given me such an acct. of those 1000 &c odds & ends I had sent you, especially, as it will undoubtedly keep me from sending you a small lot I had been getting together which I believed to be new, & might be of service – as they are just put up in the old way. At the same time I thank you doubly for your information and for your valuable candour in fully telling me. I will endeavor to make a small selection during the winter from what I have, which may be of service. 
As yr. Manual is mainly intended for N.Z. I think it not unlikely you may find a few remarks of use in the book of Notes, I, from time to time, sent you. I don’t know if I told you that I had accepted an offer from the Genl. Govt. “to get up a vocaby. N.Z. & Eng., & also 3 progressive N.Z. & E. Books – to be exd. by 1 Jany/66 for £300 “if satisfy.” (What I wanted, was to have the compiling of a N.Z. (or Polynesian) Lexicon; – time, say, 7 yrs. – pay, say £200 pr. ann. & travelling. But we have few lovers of Science of Philology &c. in our Govt. Men, or Colonists generally – Gold, Money, Bullion, Wealth, &c., is all the Cry!–– I would not have taken this job, did I not require somewhat more than I have of my own to keep my head above water: however, next year I shall have, I hope, a sufficiency (without looking abroad) but barely a suffy. Last month I had a grand offl. letter from the Commissn. of International Exhib. Otago, informing me they had “selected me as the gentleman best fit & qualified in N.Z. to write the essay on the N. Island Botany” &c. backed by an interesting & open letter from Dr Hector – also a stranger to me. I have undertaken the job (though I would rather have had the Essay on the Natives – their lang. – or that in the Zoology of N.Z.) – and have just written circulars to all the Provl. Govts. to give me what statistical informn they can respg. the economic portn. of the Essay. I am thinking of exhibiting my curious Bell; (which nearly 30 yrs ago I discovd. in the interior,) and other things, and I have copied the Inscription from it which I enclose, and hope you, through your sçavan friends or connexions, will get translated for me. I believe it to be in Javanese characters: the inscription is very perfect. I hope to get a photog. drawg. of the Bell itself taken very shortly, & if so, will send it to you – of course you will see that I believe you can get it translated without any trouble to yourself. The copy of the inscription now sent, is just exactly natural size, width & length. 
I was not aware that such (as you write) were the reguls. of L. Socy. I do not clearly understand some few words in yours – you say – “these are pub. bodies who depend on subscriptions for their life ... there is no way to Election but by paying.” If I am to understand that by “paying” subscrip. – yearly – or at once, for life, I might become elected, I shall be most ready to do so. The latter might suit me best. I am writing to my old Lond. Agent, Dixon & Co Fenchurch St., & have desired them to pay to your order £5.5.0 on my account. I wish you to lay out this sum for me getting a. c. (if to be had, & not too dear), the following: – (or, anything new, & better): –
-	Synopsis Method. Lichenium by Nylander. (I have Fasciculus I). I have also his Enum. Gen. Lichenes (1858). 
-	Botanl. plates, of Dumont D’Urvilles Voyage au Pole Sud – I have the letterpress. (I have also Sylloge Gen. Speciem. Cryptog. by Montagne – & indeed many other val. works, but I want modern plates of Crypts. especially Lichens,). 
-	Parts of Moore’s Index Filicum from No. xii inclusive: Also No. vii – missing. 
-	Sp. Filicum, from Part xiii, inclusive. 
-	A good Codrington – or some other better, lens. 
As you are much among publishers & artists, &c. – could you recommend me to any one who could be trusted to make a quantity of those book-like boxes, used by Schærer for his Lich. Exsicc. ? Having a small press & type, &c and a very great desire to be so engaged, I think I may come out with some suites of Lich. Exsicc. N.Z. – in so doing I should be able to manage all myself, free from artists, &c., – of whom we have few or none in this Country. 
Again, looking over your letter I find you state “You had made up your’s of that date, in a list of those numbers of Phænogams”. Now, the Cryptogams in your Herb. with my Nos., is what I party. wanted. I think I know all the Phænogams – excepting some of the Monocotyledones. 
By the way – was the Zoology of your great Sn. Voyage ever printed?
Our war drags its slow length along – it would have been over long ago, had not the pseudo philo-Maori party here and at home existed. The poor Maories are suffering through their falsely called friends. 
	Believe me,
		Ever yours,
			Wm Colenso. 
How I shall get on w. my Essay I hardly know. Dr. H. 
wishes me to confine to 40 pp. or so. 
& to write on Dr Muller’s plan – wh. book I have never seen. 
Do you know of any good fasciculi of Dried Lichens? I have Schærer. 
PS: In returning from Auckland we were obliged, in a gale, to take refuge in the harbour of a little island off the Coast – and where I got some curious & pleasing spns of Lichens – sea-sick as I was – I was delighted, never saw such a place for Lichens!!

 # 


30 November 1864
Auckland,
	Nov 30 1864. 
My dear Hooker
	Acting on the principle that ½ a loaf is better than no bread, (which dire resource you were not driven to when striving to hob-nob w. the S. Pole,) I write you these few lines, from this place of my “sojourn”. 
	Yesterday I recd. your kind letter of Septr. 11/64; and, first thing this morning I went to see my old friend Dr Knight – as to your immediately getting your “half-allowance”. K. shewed me letters from Morrison – of a week’s later date (17th) than yours to me – in which M. says – “he has recd. from you the 100 Books, & paid you £300” – so that I hope you have had it, – & so far, all is right. 
	I did not intend to write to you by this mail – having much to do, & many Colonial letters to reply to (all leaving here together), – and so I told K. – who had written to you, & was making up a parcel of Lichens for you when I called. My only reason for not writing – is, that I cannot do so satisfactorily from this place. It is said, one session is to be short – (to meet within 4 months at Wellington) – if so, I hope & fully purpose to write to you by next mail from N.Z. 
	I rejoice to hear of your aged & honored father being hale & hearty on the verge of 4 score! Pray present my very best respects & kindest regards, – long may Sir William enjoy good health!
	Do not be too much cast down concerning your dear loved little one: whom a good kind loving Parent has taken into an adjoining room. You and I well recollect how deeply Sir William & Lady Hooker thought on you – you returned to them, from death and dangers – you will have to join your daughter, who is freed from all and you will have a far happier meeting: Have faith in God. –
	I came here about 10 days ago. I shall not see your Books (sent to me) until I return. K. has lent his copy of Part 1 of the Manual. I had a letter from Dr Hector yesterday – he (as one of the Commissrs.) has received my Ms. of Essay – Bot. of the N. Island of N.Z. – & speaks too approvingly of it. – I only hope it may please & be of service: no doubt the Œconomic portion may be tolerably well received, but anon. –
	I have sent several things to the Dunedin Exhibition, among others your own gifts (precious & prized) of rock from Possession Island (or some other spot down South – which you will well recollect) and the Fl. Antarct. 6 vols. which I only mention now. The Bell also is there, so that its photog. &c. cannot be sent directly. 
	You may make (or have made) the acq. of my good (1st) cousin “Natal”, at the meeting – not too great an heretic for you! Not a few of his views were mine: (we were very close correspondents until the Bp. of N.Z. divided us! – but enough). 
	I will try hard for “stone hatchets” for you, I have sent 6 to Dunedin; if I cannot get any more you shall have them.–
	Gunn has been w. me at my house in Napier – he only spent a few hours on shore en route for Cook’s Straits. I learnt from him he had a copy of your Zoology. 
Sir G. Grey has had ( I think) a letter from you; as he spoke to me about visiting the Chatham Islands (wh. I had sounded him on last year,) he mentioned your name: I pointed out the great necessity of exploring all the N.Z. islets – especially – 3 Kings – Poor Knights – Fanal Isles &c. – which he agreed to: we are to talk again on this matter. 
If he would only act the Macænas  he could do much – he has it in his power to do so – every way: they say he keeps his pocket buttoned!
	I am off to the Ho. “my hour is up”. Politics and Botany – agree, much as Pea sticks & green peas. 
	With best wishes. Believe me, my dear Hooker, Ever yours. 
				W. Colenso. 
 # 


3 January 1865
Napier, New Zealand,
	3 Jany. 1865. 
My dear Hooker,
	If you believe in “better late than never”, – you will welcome an old Eng. greeting from the antipodes, of “a happy new year”; and many happy returns of the season! I received your truly kind and long letter of September 6, while at Auckland and I briefly replied by last Mail thence. 
	We were prorogued on the 13th ulto. (to meet again at Wellington before June); and I only returned to this place a few days ago, having remained a fortnight overtime to glean what Maori statistical information I could, in order to my writing another Essay for the N.Z. Exhibn. Commissrs. Dr Shortland, who was to write the one on “the Maori Races”, having gone to Engld. without doing anything, consequently they were at a loss, and applied to me., I plainly told them if I wrote another, I must be paid for it – to which they willingly consented. Worst is, I have to work both unpreparedly and against time, to be ready by March. Sir George Grey told me, I could do it easily, in 2 days!! such if so I should not have undertaken it (having plenty of other work on the stocks), were it not for Dr Hector’s letters expressive of his “very great satisfaction” at my Bot. Essay – but then he speaks as a Geologist & not as a Bot., – I sometimes think, what will t’other Dr H. at Kew say should he ever read it! I regret my undertaking this job will delay my sending you some specimens – which however I fully purpose doing immediately after, (I quite hope in April,) to be in time for your Appendix. 
	You will see, by enclosed Draft for £40. that I am going in for a Linn. Socy. F. “Compounding” (as you say) “for life” for £36. To this, my dear Hooker, you have given a great spur, in saying, – “The L. Socy. elect. all Candidates who are known to be fond of Nat. Science without selection, and would rejoice to have you for a fellow” (?) I have sold some land, and so raised a little extra cash, which enables me to spare this sum. I must, however, wait a while ere I seek admission to the Royal. I fully intend however trying for a Royal S. – if I succeed with my 2nd Essay – and if you think I have a fair chance of being elected. – When Gunn called (4 mths. ago) and left his card, he wrote in pencil under his name, “F.R.S. & F.L.S.” (!) Soon after, Heaphy (a surveyor at Auckland), wrote to me, & signed himself some foreign A. B. C. D. (Vienna), then, as luck would have it, Travers (whom I had not known), wrote me from Nelson (on Gunn’s leaving) about Chatham Islands Botany – which, he said, his son had collected & Mueller was about publishing. (I would, however, he had sent them to you, and so I told him in reply), also signing himself F.R.S. &c, &c.(!!) Then Haast wrote me, begging my support for a vote for publishing the Novara’s Voyage; letting me know he too was Dr. – F.L.S. – G.S., &c, &c, (his “Dr” making me think of Goethe’s Faust.), and lastly, a Mr Walter Buller (a young native-born son of a Wesleyan Minister) who was a Clerk in the Police Off. at Wellington, has been over & over spoken of in our local (Wesleyan) Journals as the writer of one of the Essays for N.Z. Exhib., and as an “F.L.S. &c. &c. (how he became a F., and what his qualifns. I know not,) – And then my own old acquaintances have twitted me a bit, which causes me to remember the Continental favours, &c., once offered me, if I would favour (collect) them, but which I bluntly refused. And besides & above, all this, I should greatly like to get the L.S. transactions, and perhaps (hereafter) be privileged to print free of cost, some petite brochure monograph, on something local. 
	Arriving here I found all the pacquets you had kindly sent me: viz. HandBook, N.Z. – Species Filicum – Moore’s Index Fil., (and by last Mail parts xii & xiii) – and Nylander’s Cryptog. part I (instead of II, which only I regretted – in your letter you had stated Part II) –
	I thank you sincerely for the HandBook, and have already been dipping into it with fresh zest – and for all your kind trouble on my account and beg you to give my very best thanks & kindest regards to your respected Father – for his kind present of the concluding parts of the Sp. Fil. I beg to congratulate him upon his having completed it. (What a world of synonomy! and of species and varieties of the Cosmopolite Ferns! and what labour!!) And I sincerely hope he will long continue to enjoy good health, so as to be able to complete that useful & valuable work with his promised appendix volume. 
	I am vexed w. Moore (as I was w. J. Smith) at his multitudinous molecular genera – proving beyond doubt (if correct) there is no such thing in nature as a genus. While, on the other hand I confess I don’t like your (in HandBook) uniting Grammitis, Niphobolus, Polypodium, &c. into one genus. I am exceedingly glad you have at last allowed the 2nd Phormium: ditto the large Ruahine Aciphylla: ditto the 3rd sp. of Coriaria (of which there are yet more good N.Z. sp.,); the 2nd sp. of Libocedrus; and the 3rd sp. of our N. Island Gentian. I think you have overlooked a valid sp of Podocarpus – large leaved, with larger & longer pedicelled male flowers (P. Cunningh. mihi,) found in the lower Ruahine forests, a very different tree from P. Totara: also, a sp. of Dracæna, – while I think I have another sp. from Auckland: – and I cannot hold w. you, in your uniting so many of the Gaultheria under G.G. antip. & rupest., – of Hoheria under H. populnea; – & of Dracophyllum under D. Urvilleanum. I cannot conceive who this “Mrs Jones” can be (I shall, know, however, from my gossip Knight.) – I know well the Book to which you refer. She had given you wrong inform. – (e.g. Gleichenia circinata, p.348, – the nat. statement refers to Pt. esculenta) the seedlings being very peculiar (segment of pinnules crenulate) in foliage: and Loxsoma, p.358, – fronds are glaucous under when young, like Cyathea, &c., which in age they lose: & so with her habitats from hearsay; but I hope to note all for you, by & bye, for a 2nd Ed. You have also made a few errors in habitats, through supposing “Totaranui” of Banks & Sol. to be in the N. Island: also, in some of the plants from A. Cunn’s. herbm; which I had sent him or given to him, & wh. you state to be from the Bay of Islands, but which are not so. I am much pleased at the sp. novæ from the Mid. Island: I feel assured we have scores yet unknown as well in the N as in the other Islands. – I should much like to hear if you have anything new among Knights’ Lichens. I think you did right in dedg. your Book to the Govr. – although I wish he was more liberal – he can well afford to be. Don’t you think your HandBook would look better (and perhaps please the people) if bound more Book and less Pait fashion? i.e. not cut off square: such makes it look smaller &c. –
	Dixon has not forwarded the glasses – saying he cannot do so by post (?) I shall write him next Mail. We are all waiting to hear somewhat of the Bell Inscription; hoping the Europ. sçavans will dicypher it. Did you make my good Cousin’s (Natal) acquaintance at Bath? If you are in corresp. w. Sir G. Grey stir him up as to the necessity of having the islets explored: and as I wish to have the preparing of a Library Lexicon of the N.Z. (& cognate Polynesian) tongue – at, say, £200 a year until completed – which, if done as I have suggested, would give a good deal of travelling among all the secluded natives, especially in the Interior, seeking after nearly extinct philologl. lore and consequently noble opportunities of Botanizing in untrodden regions – you might say a word advantageously on this head also. I have the Ministry with me, and apparently Sir George – but somehow I am always secretly circumvented, or put off, I think (inter nous) owing to the Bp of N. Zealand. 
	Adieu! Believe me Ever yours
				Wm Colenso. 
 # 


3 March 1865

Napier, Hawke’s Bay,
New Zealand, 3 March 1865

My Dear Hooker
While I was thinking and thinking (between other doings) whether I should write to you by this Mail, lo! yours of December 3rd arrived & or. turned the favour. I was very glad indeed to see your handwriting therein, as it was a favour wholly unexpected – I thank you for it. As to that Bell; I hope one (near) day to give you its history in full, but cannot just now: (it is now at Dunedin Exhibtn, exciting talk, &c “down South”). I sincerely hope you will be able to get its inscription decyphered; we are all looking out for that. I trust by next (April) Mail to send you my few Crypts, &c. for your appendix, and indeed that was the chief reason why I did not make up my mind to write now. I forward (as I now do, enclosed) the 2nd of the Bank draft for £40 (the origl. I sent you in Jan. I hope it has reached you.) 
	Speaking of your diffy. in making crypt. descriptions intelligible: do you know most of Zuckermann’s Synopsis N.Z. Lichens, his descripts. I mean; I always liked his manner; so also your honoured Father, in English Flora. I think both these works are plain and clear. At the same time I see the difficulty. – Last week I finished my 2nd Essay for this “Exhibition”; I sent it to Dr. Hector & his compeers will get it tomorrow. 
	I commenced it early in Jany. & finished it about the mid. of Feby: – (deducting 2 days ea. week & interruptions,) – about 150 closely & clearly written fcap. folio pp.) – the copying (so as to be clear &c) gave me great labour owing to the non-use of my thumb. (and now I have the Notes & Tables (say 20 pps.) to be ready by 16th inst., day of Str’s. leaving Napier. I fear it may prove too long for them: it is original enough & may (will?) be called un-orthodox by some, who do not, will not, – or dare not think. Strange!  2 days after I had posted it, I rec. a note from Hector, (with a Ms. copy of an Essay written by Dr Shortland – very fragmentary, sloppy, & illogical,) which had just reached their hands – place from, & how, unknown. I am now writing to Hector, saying if there is the slightest hesitancy as to mine being printed – to return it. I should like to have more time. There is little of labor time in it – Having despatched the notes &c., on 16th. I turn to the Crypts for you; and to go (quickly) thro’ your Hand Book, part i: that is my next job. The Govt. has ordered me to “proceed with the Maori Lexicon”; & which, I hope, will be a means of my doing much more for you in exploring the hidden Botanl. treasures of our interior – always supposing our war is to be ended. And then grasses, Cyperaceæ & Restiaceæ as you wish, shall be looked after. But while I say the Govt. has ordered me to proceed with the Lexicon: I do not know the terms: what I wanted was £200 a year, & expenses (not above £100 per ann.) while travelling among distant outlying Maoris intending to visit every outlying tribe in all the N.Z. Islands; for it is not w. me, as w. Dr. Johnson, – [having spun out my own web must seek abroad from the old living – but dying, receptacles of philological lore.] By the way, Mantell is now “Native Minister”, (& through him, I expect, I gained the appointment) are you not well acquainted w. him? If so, urge him a bit: – I have lots of pol. (& other) enemies (but they neither hinder my sleep, nor my decision), & if my “Essay” should be pubd. in its entirety, I shall have more for you: do you recollect Faust’s speech to Wagner in his study? – 
To return, I have had another letter from Francis (Nelson) who sent me enclosed a sp. of Lindsæa linearis – thinking it was new: first time however, I have heard of its being found so far South. He also sent me a copy of Müellers Chatham Islands Vegetation, just pubd., which no doubt you will have seen. I was both pleased & displeased, at the Book: pleased to see such good plates exd. at Melbourne: displeased (as I have told Francis) – it was not done by you, as well as seeing incl. lots of valid species shoved all together as one! e.g. Veronica Forsteri (20 sp. of yours! – 2/3rds of which, at least, are bonæ). So with Ferns, &c. I do not understand Müeller when he speaks of Dracophyllum scoparium 40 ft high!  I almost believe his new Myrsine (M. chathamica) is ident. w. a sp. I found here 15 yrs. ago (at Tangoio) & sent you – only a little more developed. I am pleased too, at the 2 arborescent Compositæ – how such cleave to islets! only 9 phænogams, wh. are endemic – & perhaps not all these. But I don’t think Francis Jun. a first rate collector; and then the cattle, sheep & pigs, – must there (as they have here) play wrecker. 
I wish you had sent me a proof sheet of (a sheet) your work from its commencement. I might have, I think, helped you better than I can now in rushing through the whole Book: – I wish I had it before I wrote my Essay, as I have now referred to our Plants from your Flora N.Z. I enclose a scrap, (sent to me by last mail from an unknown), gathered in Auckland Prov. – I am asked if it is indig. I do not recollect it. Another asks me if “Potamogeton pectinatus, is ident. with P. flabellatus Bab.,” – all I can say is – “I don’t know. P. flab.” – not in Hooker, Sowerby, or Kunth. I am also written to for spcs of Astelia linearis, & A. nervosa: but I have none to give. I hope & fully purpose to aid you in specs. of Astelia by & bye – say, next summer; but here, I have none nearer than the Ruahine range. I will ascertain as to your Panax longissimum – being a sp: – I have always consid. it to be the young of P. crassifolium. I will do my best also to ansr. fully your enquiries respg. the Batatas or Ipomæa – Taro, &c. – and I hope in time for your appendix. The “stone hatchets” too, I am looking out for, and writing about to my acquaintances. I am glad to hear your respected Father is so well & still at his facs. work: Sir William may (w. Schærer) quote Cicero: “Ha studia adolescentiam alunt, senectutem oblectant:” Pray remember me most kindly to your honoured parent. I am delighted to hear your family are all so well. 

Go on, & prosper, & God bless you,
		Ever yours truly,
			Wm Colenso. 

(No answer required)

 # 

 
3 June 1865
Napier, H. Bay, N. Zealand,
June 3 1865
My Dear Hooker
	You, and for you, have occupied much of my head & hands of late. By this Mail from us I hope you will receive a lot of Botl. specimens from me: I say, “hope”, – as I send them (in 2 small boxes) hence to our Dr Knight (who has kindly promised to forward them to you, cost free, – which he can do, – but whether he is now at the new headquarters – Wellington, I know not. They number 330 – of which upwards of 300 are crypts – mostly Lichenes, (no Alga) and many are small. I hope you will find more than 50 sp. nov., at least, to N.Z. Many are, to me peculiar & interesting. A few are sent as being good fruiting spns. of some formerly sent – a few others are from Auckland & Barrier Island as being from N. of us. If you find ½ the lot – or even 100 of service to you & to your scientific friends, I shall be satisfied. I must, however, tell you that many (most) would not now be sent had I the 2nd vol. of your “Hd. Bk.” – or even your “Fl. Antarct.” (lent by me to Dunedin Exhibition) by me: but as I have been (I may say) importuned to “do my best towards making your Cryptog. part as complete as possible” (and as I really wish it to be so) I send you nearly all I have lately collected, omitting only those Lichens I know to be common. A few of the specimens (where scarce) are very small; but in most cases, I shall be able to send you more hereafter if wished: and be very sure to mind their numbers. As it is very likely you may have skilled help handy, I shall be quite willing (if needed) to pay such for a list accurately determining the Crypts. by their numbers. 
	At some of the scraps of the Phænogams you may smile – or be vexed – but they have been sent to me in letters, &c by acquaintances from peculiar localities, and I have shared them with you: only giving you the lion’s share. 
	I have not forgotten your last request concerning our kumara, &c. &c. and have tried (by writing) to do something, but hitherto without success. I am still expecting to hear from my N. correspondents, but this miserable war spoils all!
	I fully intend (if not before) to do all you require next season: by going personally among the Maoris, where such plants are still cultivated: very little of that kind – nothing – is now done so far S. as this. Two months ago I had a pressing letter from Travers, begging me to help him (for you): as I could not, I pointed out the proper localities, and wrote again to the N. Travers kindly sent me a sp. (one) of Trichomanes Malingii, which is certainly very curious, and (as you say) very near Hymenophyllum æruginosum. I am much interested in 2 or 3 ferns now sent – especially a Trichomanes, a Doodia, and a Cyathea – which I cannot reconcile with any of your pubd. ones. Also a Cordyline from Auckland, which I believe to be another species. It was used to decorate the walls of the store, there in which the Horticult. Exhibn. was held. I saw, at a glance, it was new to me: it is tall, slender, & branched, with long leaves resembling C. Banksii, and no doubt grew in the neighbourhood: owing, however to the wet weather which came on., – the distance, – and the carelessness of the servants, I could not get a better specimen. My 2 Essays are now going through the press (so I hear from Hector) but, owing to want of funds, nearly all the Essays will have to be shortened, & much of mine in Boty. of N.Z., (N. Island) will have to be omitted – would I had your HandBook before I wrote it! Essay, No. 2 (“Maori Races”) is, I believe, kept entire, although doubly long; but, (to judge from 1st sheet sent me,) will abound in provoking typogl. errors! Dr Hector has put me down on title page, as “F.L.S.”(!!) – without a hint of any kind from me – and it was printed off before I saw it. I gladly enclose 2 copies of a photog. & lithog. of “the Bell” just received from Hector; he had asked permission to have it done to send to Singapore, to a Mr Logan, who is said to be well up in such matters. Our antipodean sçavans say the Inscript. is Tamul. I have long known of a few of the chars. (i.e. 4th, 5, 8, 17, 21, & 23;) agreeing with the Tamul, but these are (excepting the 8th) only simple forms, which more or less would be sure to obtain in the E. language chars. The concluding words on plate (put in at Dunedin) – “Its history, &c, is long and interesting.” are liable to mislead considerably – I believe I have such somewhere. I know I had 28 yrs ago but where?
	I think I must have told you in my last in March, that I had obtained the appointment to write the Maori Lexicon: (there is no doubt that I had, for I have the offl. Letter!). but this, I am sorry to say, has since vanished! (Thanks (?) to my secret enemies!) Mantell (now Native Minister) and myself have had much scribbling about it but without getting any nearer; in a few more days, however we meet (General Assembly) face to face, but I have ceased expecting it; and shall, notwithstanding, hope all for the best, – as next Summer I shall seek to travel in the interior “on my own hook”. Would that the war was at an end but I shan’t fear, as I am too well-known to the Maoris and I never had any of their lands. 
	I have a sheet of jottings on your Hd. Book, 1st Pt., which I hope to send by next Mail. Our English March Mail (due here on 26th ult.) has not yet turned up. Of course, isolated as I am here, I have not heard anything from anyone about the “Hd. Bk”. Hector has been far too busy with his Exhibition; and Knight, ditto. in running & recommencing his offl. duties de novo: but in my going to the Genl. Assy., for 3 months certain, I shall be sure to hear. I believe the 100 copies you sent, are still unpacked!!
	If I were you I would not hurry the 2nd part, (although I am most anxious to see it). Have a good plain Glossary of hard words, written for the lowest capacity; and a clear general Index to all. I have noticed, in Part 1 some typos & errors in references, figures &c. 
	I have somehow mislaid two small parcels of plants – containing N. Crypts. & a few Phænogams from this neighd., among the latter – a Thlaspi, (or perhaps, of your nov. gen. Notholaspi) was the most striking, as new. I see Moore, in his Index Fil. still gives N.Z. as a hab. for Asplenium difforme, R.Br. – is this correct? 
	I have ascertained beyond doubt that a large Agaric, which formerly plagued me a good deal (both in my old garden, and in attempting to preserve for you) is A. comatus, Müll. I had an elegant little Agaric – a perfect gem which grew out (fringing) from the margins of the dead leaves of Cordyline australis; it had a little filiform stem, 1-1½ l. long, & preserved very well, but in removing I have mislaid my specimens. 
	Pray give my very best respects & kindest regards to your dear father, Sir William, and believe me ever & always,
	Yours faithfully & Heartily. 
		W. Colenso. 
11 September 1865
Wellington, N.Z. 
	September 11/65
My dear Hooker 
I have been here attending to Parliamy. duties ever since 20th July, and have scarcely got ½ through the Session! I have only just recd., by return steamer from Napier (Hawke’s Bay) my English letters of June – among which is one from Secy. Linn. Soc., announcing my being a “fellow”, this I cannot answer now but intend to by next S. Mail. For your kindness in this matter I am again indebted. I have 20 things to tell you of, a few of them I must write about. 
1. I send by this mail a small box of Kumara roots: I sought all over the Island (& encouraged Travers to do the same), and at last have obtained these from “Doubtless Bay” near the N. Cape. I have 3 times as many as I now send, but, as the season is advanced, I only send you a few – planting the rest myself at Napier, in order to send them earlier next year. I shall be glad to hear of these reaching you safely. Those roots have been more than 2 months sacked (separately) in a box, and now seem in admirable condition. There are several other sorts – one a golden yellow flesh one – possibly Forster’s – Chrysorhizus(?). 
2. Hector is now here, & will soon be at work: on our Estimates upwards of £4,000 is placed for him & his Geolog. Depart. – his Museum is nearly finished. I have already spent a few hours looking at some of his S. Island plants, and sighing over some of his drawings. (made by old Buchanan) – both for their simple beauty, and as being reminiscences of the past! – We (H. & self) have had many “chats”, & hope to have many more; – we agree on most points, & I believe in him; science (at home & here) has a valuable son & disciple. My essay on “The Maori Races” (of which I have thought so much, – perhaps too much) has been wholly printed – 108, 8vo. pps. – & I have recently gone over it, in order to write out a table of errata, or corrigenda, but Hector & his confreres have determined it should be wholly reprinted.!! so that the pleasure of sending you a copy is yet to come: ditto as to the Essay on “the Bot. of the N. Island” – which is also (I find) to be reprinted. It is a “100 pities” (& not quite fair) that I should have been so remorselessly hurried in the writing them! & yet no advance made. –
3. Sir G. Grey has been talking with me to undertake the visiting the Southern Islets, &c. – Auckland, Campbell, MacQuarrie, Emerald, – (but you know them all) – but I have been obliged to decline: it is not that I am too old, (though I can not now stand the wear & tear I have daily endured in travelling,) but, I suffer so much from sea-sickness! I never knew one to approach me in that abomination, (not even a delicate lady!) with me it does not wear off – I am as bad at the end as at the beg. of a voy., & medical men have assured me, I ought never to go to sea. But while I decline, I have a good (better?) substitute in Dr H. – whose fitness I have advocated. I should like to travel in the unknown parts of this island – particularly between Taupo Lakes & the W. Coast, around Mt Egmont, & up that Mt., and in several other little known parts; you know, that I am a great believer in the peculiar localization of our Flora; and I still believe we have many unknown plants here in the N. Island. If I could get my order for the Great Library Polynesian Lexicon, (once agreed to) it would enable me to do both – go a word-hunting in the little known districts, and a Botanizing as well: but, hitherto, nothing has been done by either Govr. or Minisr. – plenty of promises – extending over 3-4 years, (which I no longer value,) – the truth is I sit on a X bench in our Parliament; I will not (because I cannot) “go the whole hog” for either side; so I cannot be bought: had I been more pliable I should (no doubt) have had the Order long ago! ––
4. The Bell (of which I sent you from Napier a photo-lithog.): – its inscription has been translated at Ceylon; it is said to be written in Tamil chars. and I just give you all I know of it: (obtained from Colombo, Ceylon; by Mr Cargill of Otago, who had written to a friend resident there.) –
“The inscriptn. on the Bell is Tamil, & it has been translated as follows by difft. parties. 
‘The Bell belonging to the ship Mohidia Bux’ and
‘The Bell belongs to the ship Mohidia Bux’
“The word belongs is written twice over. The writing is more that of Coast Tamil than of Ceylon Tamil or Moormen, neither of the parties could say anything as to the age of the writing, or rather inscriptn. A son of old Canjemadaran, the Customs Shroff, says, the writing is like that of the Panewa people of Tulicorin. – Mohidia Bux is a very common name of Native Vessels about Ceylon and Southern India.” ––
	All this is far from being satisfactory to me. That it is Tamul, or Tamil, seems clear enough: but what is the meaning of “M. Bux” – when did such become a name for ships: when did this shaped char. (seeing it varies much from the mad Tamil of books) cease to be written – & that people cease to make such Bells. Then its way from the Malabar Coast to N.Z. &c., &c., – but of all this more anon. ––
5. Your “Manual” has been much spoken of – of course you never expected to please every body: a few thought it would be “illustrated”, and another few thinks it is not “popularly written,” so as to enable anyone to find immediately his plant: – but the majority (including all scientific men, & lovers of science, who well-know there is no Royal road to knowledge) thinks very highly of it, and both it, and your “Flora”, has been extensively used here in the Gen. Assy. Library – while I am besieged with questions, & scrap specimens (sometimes single leaves from Canterbury), to give a name &c. Of the 100 Copies I have had 2 allotted me, & I have bought 2 sets more from Govt. (for distribution at Hawkes Bay) at 15/- per vol. – £3.0.0 pd. down. I shall enclose a specimen or two (which I have lately received by letter) in the Box of Kumara roots: they may be new – they are to me – I could not get our friend Dr K. to frank this packet, in fact he flatly refused. I fear I have offended him. (Entre nous, he is rather crotchetty at times.) I have, howr. got our Under-Secy. to frank it, which he has done w. pleasure. Dr K. also told me that the last 2 packages I had sent you, through him, were detained here a month. I hope you will have got them safely. –
	I have very nearly ready a few remarks made at Hawke’s Bay, in going over your Manual which I propose sending by next Mail. I repeat; I would not hurry your 2nd vol. You will, I think, find some interesting matter, Maori names of plants, &c., in the old Mss. I formerly sent you. In one of them I revised all Cunningham’s: in another, I gave you all I then knew. –
	Some London Gentleman (Ed. of the “Gardener’s Chronicle”) has written to me for a contribn. to that work – speaking of you as our mutual friend. Unforty. I do not know the work – and I may not find a copy in this part of the world. –
	Our miserable war still continues, when will it end? Mantell is no longer Native Minister: had he but attended for a day to what I repeatedly wrote to him & he had promised (the Lexicon) that matter would have been settled, and I now casting about for the approaching summer – Hoping you & yours are all well; and desiring best respects to your much esteemed Father,
		I am, My Dear Hooker, Yours,
				W. Colenso. 


P.S. 

September 13/65
My dear Hooker – I have this morning carefully packed your Kumara roots, and shall be very glad to hear of their safely reaching you. Of course you know they love sun and a gravelly soil, disliking cold and wet. I put off packing them till our “Supplementary Mail Steamer” should be ready, that they might have 4 or 5 days less confinement. – I have also put in 3 or 4 sps. of plants, which I have lately received. I am particularly interested in one of them – a fine Moss, a Dawsonia (which I have named D. N.Z. – and, if it is new & correct as to genus, I will thank you to allow it to stand – i.e. don’t re-christen him.) I had but 2 specimens – the one I keep is without a Calyptra, – it was found to the N. of Auckland, was sent to me as Polytrichum Menziesii; and has cost me 2 or 3 letters, ere I got this one perfect specimen 
Of the sp. of Metrosideros (which seems to be near M. lucida) I am promised better specimens – this sp. has been sent to me from Canterbury to decide as to its being a “Rata” (M. robusta) which it is not: it is called Rata there. Of the Veronica (a truly lovely sp.) I hope to send you more by & bye from cuttings (of the one sp. sent me, which I planted under glass just before I left Napier.) The little Hepatica came also by letter, & must speak for itself. – I think I shall get you a few specimens from these parts ere I leave, which won’t be for 6-7 weeks – although we have already been in Session 50 days. 
	I won’t touch on Politics. Merely say that last night (or this mg. at ½ past 1, commencing yesterday at xii a.m.) concluded a fearful 4 days heavy debate on the separation of these 2 Islands – so as to form two colonies: the whole arising from the N. Island having diverse interests from the Southern one. (N. Maories, S. goldfields) and yet sool (?ined) after a faction by Southerners who know nothing of Maories, & whose Policy is utopian & ruinous. Farewell. 
	Yours truly
W. Colenso. 

 # 



 
3 November 1865
Wellington
New Zealand
Nov. 3. 1865
My dear Hooker
	I have just been sadly grieved with the melancholy tidings of your irreparable loss: allow me to sympathize with you in your great affliction. Yours is not a common loss: the whole world of Science mourns with you. It is some alleviation (which we should not wholly overlook,) that Sir William attained to a good old age, and (if not to riches) to justly earned titles and honour. I find, from our good friend Dr Hector, that you yourself were also dangerously ill at the time of your lamented father’s decease. I sincerely hope you are quite recovered, and “all right” again: and that all your family are well. 
	I cannot write to you fully by this mail – as I had intended, – having been again writing for Dr Hector, and his Dunedin Exhibition. (Going again over my old Essay, to make the names accord with your new ones in Manual, &c.)
	I hope and intend to write to you by the next Mail. 
	We have just broken up after 3 months and 1 week in Session. During the last month we threw out the Ministry and have had much hard work – i.e. the working bees, among which class I am. 
	I was very glad to see your name among the subscribers to the Natal fund. I think my good cousin has had hard times of it. I write in great hurry, as I am about returning to Napier. 
	Believe me,
	My dear Hooker, ever,
		W. Colenso
 # 


29 November 1865

A few notes made in going through Dr. Hooker’s
“Hand Book of N. Zealand Flora”: part I
_______________________

page 10. Drimys axillaris – certainly 2 species in N.Z. 
16. Viola Cunninghamii (if true Erpetion spathulatum of Cunningh.) found at Bay of Islands. 
22. Gypsophila tabulosa – not “increasing” – not “imported”: very local, & very scarce. 
26. Spergularia rubra, – not “common”: only found by me in 2 spots – i.e. near Cape Kidnappers, and at mouth of Porangahau river nr. Cape Turnagain. 
29. Hypericum gramineum, not N. of E. Cape. 
31. Hoheria populnea (vera), not seen by W.C. South of Bream Bay. 
      Hibiscus? Trionum: seeds not glabrous. 
38. Oxalis corniculata; right glad to see varieties allowed. 
39. Phebalium nudum; not found by A. Cunning., but sent by me to him; nor by Edgerley on “E. Coast”; very local. 
41. Dysoxylum – “Mid. Island; Forster”?? where. 
44. Discaria Toumatou(!!) I hate this sp. name. It is a great pity you did not earlier make this a sp. I found it in 1838, and sent it early to Cunningm., and to Sir W. Hooker, pointing out certain differences: (vide, L. Jl. Botany, vol. iii. p.17) “Toumatou”! (if it means anything, means Anus albus tuus!! its native name is expressive, Tumatakuru. (The French have invariably made gross mistakes in attempting to give the Maori name of anything). 
46. Coriaria: Glad to see N.Z. sp. of this genus; and believe there are others: C. thymifolia, & C. angustissima, are not found N. of the E. Cape. 
52. Clianthus, I still believe we have 2 species, or, at least, well marked varieties known to settlers. I have a fine plant of the S. var. now in my garden 10 feet high, and I saw another at Wellington trained over porch about same height – a beautiful object. 
53. Rubus – a southern sp. again omitted. It may be that all Cunning. sp. are merely vars. – but of the distinctness of the local E. Coast plant (R. aphyllus, mihi), I never had a doubt: see, L. Jl. Bot., vol. iii. p.9. –
64. Drosera auriculata? – This may be the D. of the North, but ours (Hawke’s Bay) is not the same as the common Bay of Islands’ plant. All the leaves of ours (H. Bay), plant are on slender petioles; none of them are peltate; the cauline only lunate; the margins of the leaves are fringed; the 2 upper corners of cauline leaves are greatly produced & trifect, sepals & petals, are retuse, truncate, & ragged not unlike the fig. of D. lunata, Ic. Plant. tab. 54, (wh. ref. not noticed in Fl. Nov. Zeal. nor in Fl. Tasm.)
84. Tetragonia trigyna: I wrote you about this, their fleshy drupæ were full of red juice. used as “red ink” by natives & settlers, but fugitive. Vide, L. Jl. Boty. vol. iii. S. 16: see also Müeller, Fl. Chath. Islands, p.12. 
88. Pozoa trifoliolata: “Totara-nui, North Island”. This is an error occurring in several places, – Banks Solander’s “Totara-nui”, is in middle Island; (Sth. of Cook’s Straits.) Note, under Crepis N.Z., p.164, Totaranui, is for once, rightly placed. 
90. Eryngium vesiculosum.” Auckland to Otago”. Cape Palliser to Otago. 
92. Glad you have, at length, acknowledged my large Aciphylla. 
96. Ligusticum aromaticum I take this to be Ruahine alpine sp., but surely Banks never found it in the “N. Island”? in the N. I. it is very uncommon
101. Panax anomalum – “pine swamps, Bay of Islands, and elsewhere, not unfrequent.” (?) Have no recollection of its being found so far N. – my first meeting with it is mentioned, L. Jl. Botany, vol. iii. p.49 (No. 234), – in very dry ground on high ranges in Waikato, it is very unfrequent & local in the N. Island. 
  ″   Panax crass., & P. long., I believe will prove one sp. at all events I have never seen ft. nor fl. on the young fishing-rod plant (P. long). which is common enough at the N., and to which (in hopes of its being a sp. nov.) I paid extra attention in my first years of exploration. The natives (acute observers) always said it was the young of P. crass., and have only one name for both. 
  ″  P. Lessonii, – “Mid, Island, Bream Bay, D’Urville.” – Is there a “Bream Bay” in the “Mid. Island”? There is between the Bay of Islands and the Thames, and the French were there. 
   ″  P. arboreum, – instead of “Common in forests” – rather say, common on sea-coasts & banks of rivers. 
107. Loranthus flavidus – “Northern Island: Totaranui, Banks & S.” (Totaranui is in S. Island). There are, I think, one or two more sps. of Loranthus from Ruahine mountains, (where I found 3 species), one of them however, may be L. tenuiflorus, but (from what you say of “one bad sp.,”) I doubt it. If one should prove to be L. tetrapetalus, it was found by me there on Fagus, & not on Metrosideros, or Vitex. 
108. Viscum salicornioides – so far from being “common” is most uncommon in N. Island, only 3 very circumscribed local habitats being known in N. Island, viz. Kerikeri Waterfall, in one spot on road from Paihia to Waimate – and in a glen at Wellington: only found on Leptospermum, Dracophyllum, & Gaultheria. 
109. Alseuosmia quercifolia – not “from Bay of Islands, Te Hawera;” but, Bay of Islands; and also in spot in dense forest of Te Hawera; and nowhere (as far as I know) intervening. 
118. Coprosma acerosa, – I doubt this species been found in “forests”; it is peculiarly maritime or, in the interior, on dry sandy exposed sps. “dunes”. 
121. Asperula – “smallest flg. plant except Tillæa & Lemna in the Islands.”(?) – Drosera pygmæa, Raoulia 2 sp., Elatine, Glossostigma, Limosella, pygmæa Luzula, Alepyrum, &c. 
139. Bidens pilosa – if not indig. in N.Z., how should it be found in Kermadec Island?
144. Craspedia fimbriata – surely more than 1 sp. 
146. Ozothamnus glomeratus – “dry hills from Bay of Islands to Otago” (??) I have not found it N. of E. Cape. Cunning. had it from me. All the other sp. I secured are from Mid Island. Vide L. Jl. Botany, vol. iii. p.26
164. Crepis: – C omitted, in describing species. 
165. Taraxacum – my large specimens from the interior must have been indig. But I was forcibly struck (while at Wellington) in seeing the introduced plant common every where, while the N.Z. plant was very very scarce; there is something in this: is our plant not really distinct?
166. Sonchus oleraceus – glad to see 2 vars., ought to be 2 species. 
179. Epacris pauciflora – “on dry hills & swampy grounds common as far S. as Nelson.” Was found by me S. of Bay of Islands, and there on open dry clayey hills. 
182. Dracophyllum Urvilleanum – cannot agree with you in all those plants being merely vars. of Urvilleanum. 
187. Olea montana “Bay of Islands, Cunn.” Surely an error? I am all but positively certain this tree is not at the North. I have little (if any) doubt you have had from me a 4th species, well known to the Natives of the interior, but of which I have not yet had perfect specimens. 
201. Calceolaria Sinclairii – coralla always white, spotted with purple. 
221. Rhabdothamnus – from Bay of Islands to Wellington (purple) (?). It is excessively local – Bay of Islands, its head quarters; never seen by me S. of Whangarei (Bream Bay). 
228 Plantago Raoulii – by no means “abundant” N. Island. I remember more than once disputing with Cunning. this plant was not P. varia. I have doubts about P. major being “introduced”. If Banks & S., or Forster, found it, it is indig: the Natives have a proper name for it, & say it is indig. –
      N.B. Forster, in his “Observations” (4to., 1778), p.169, – in speaking of the No. of species or Veg. in N.Z., says, – “our requisitions of new species from thence amount to 120 & upwards. The known ones, recorded already in the works of Linnæus, are only six”. (I do not positively know what those “six” comprise. I have noted, Forster’s speaking (in his voyage) of the Common Coriaria, as “C. ruscifolia”, (although in his Prodr. he named it C. sarmentosa,) which must be one of the six & “Sonchus oleraceus” another. A. Cunningh. in his “Prodromus”, gives “D’Urville, 1827”, as the first Bot. not. of Plantago major in N.Z. If you have never read Forster’s “Observations”, and also his “Voyage” (2 vol. 4to.), they are worthy of dipping into). 
253. Ascarina – “N. Island, Totaranui, Banks & S.” Error. 
254. Piper excelsum – “leaves are eaten”!! rather, the pulp of ripe fruit rejecting the seeds. 
257. Right glad to see a 2nd sp. of Libocedrus. 
258. P. dacrydioides – “twigs used for Eel-basket,” – certainly not – rather of P. spicata. 
259. (misprinted “952”). Dacrydium Colensoi – surely the large Northern tree (Ic. Plant t. 548,) on which Sir William Hooker founded the sp., is not identical with the little ones from near Tongariro?
262. Dendrobium Cunninghamii – “throughout Northern & Mid. Islands abundant” (??) Although abundant about Bay of Islands, I have never once seen it S. of the Thames. I have never seen a single plant Dendrobium from Bream Bay to Cape Palliser 36° to 42° S. excepting a small plant I found on rocks near to Cape Palliser & again once on a tree in the neighbouring valley of Wairarapa. (50 miles inland from that Cape,) which I have ever believed to be distinct from D. Cunning., and to be near (if not really) D. biflorum. Its flowers were not expanded. 
263. Bolbophyllum pygmæum (in Hand Book, misprinted “D. pygmæum”) is by no means common in N. Island – though generally diffused, it is rather rare. 
282. Cordyline – there is still another arboreous sp. of which I have several in my garden, (all shoots from the one I had 20 years ago) all flourishing but never flowering! It is very distinct. The natives know it well, they formerly ate the trunk which is softish – smooth-barked – &c, but it must be very rare. I have never seen another plant. I begin to believe it is one of those introduced plants (like Kumara & Caladium. I sent you specimens of its leaves. It would rank (I think) next to C. australis. Then there is the long-leaved one I saw at Auckland of which I have lately sent you a specimen. 
283. Dianella – I doubt this plant being found in the “Middle” Island. 
284. Astelia – there is another species which grows in beds, or patches on the low wet grounds at the N. (near Bream Bay); its leaves are about a foot long, and are broad berries orange coloured; I think it will range between linearis and nervosa; I believe I formerly sent you specimens, but poor ones. I have recently heard of another N. species, from a correspondent. 
287. Phormium – 2 species acknowledged at last! Thanks, – I hope to see Hector’s 3rd. 
316. Carex trifida, 		)
        C. Neesiana    		) “N. Island, Totaranui.” No. 
317. C. Lambertiana 	)
347. Gleichenia circinata, var. β. hecistophylla: – I cannot agree in this being only a var. of G. circinata
350. Cyathea Cunninghamii – Cunning. (I think) never saw it growing: I sent him his specimens. 
351. Dicksonia lanata. idem. ditto. 
359. Lindsæa linearis – by no means “common” in N. Island, very local. 
362. Hypolepis distans – “near Cape M. V. Diemen, Edgerley”?? E. was certainly no nearer to the Cape than Hokianga, more than a 100 miles distant: at Hokianga I also found it. 
370. Doodia caudata – “the fragrant fern of Wairarapa Valley”?? Rather Polypodium pustulatum. Is Doodia found so far S. ? I have never seen it. 
 ″    Only “5 separate forms of Asplenia in the Islands of N.Z.” To this I cannot assent. I note, Moore, in his “Index Filicum,” p.124, gives N.Z. as a habitat for Asplenium difforme, R. Br., but on what authority?
372. Asplenium caudatum, Forst., the same as Asplen. Forsterianum, mihi,? vid. Tasmanian Philosoph. Journal, vol. ii. p.171. 
  ″   A. falcatum, never has a “Rhizome creeping”; always single & tufted. 
384. Leptopteris hymenophylloides – is surely not in the “Middle Island”? 
384. Leptopteris superba – “passes into L. Hymenophylloides,” I never once saw any approach to such. 
385. Lygodium articulatum – not in “Mid.” Island. 
  ″   Schizæa dichotoma – “in marshy places”!?? Only found in high dry forests, and there only on bases of the Kauri trees. 
386. What of my 4-leaved Ophioglossum?
389. Lycopodium laterale: “Mid. Island”. Query. 
   ″  Tmesipteris Forsteri – certainly 2 species: no one can confound the small light-green plant of the N., (nearly confined to Fern trees, particularly on Cyathea dealbata), with the larger black-green plant of the S., – besides the production of the mucro is different. (R. Brown’s (Prodr. p.164) obs. “Planta Forsteri differt foliis apice non truncatis, &c” is correct: we have both forms in N.Z. 
391. Psilotum triquetrum – give, Rangitoto Island near Auckland, Epiphytical (on Pohutukawa) Metrosideros tomentosa) as a habitat. 
_____________________

Addenda
              In your Fl. Tasmania, vol. i p.228, you say. – “In New Zealand the 2 forms or species, Sonchus oleraceus, and S. asper, are both Native; and the S. oleraceus has all been imported from Europe, &c.” – I never can allow that both forms are Native; only one was originally known. 
               Lowe, in his Br. & Ex. Ferns, vol. iv. pl. 51, gives New Zealand as a habitat for Lomaria nuda: – I have never seen it; & should like to know his authority. 

Wm. Colenso
Napier, N. Zealand
Novr. 1865. 
 # 


6 December 1865
Napier, H. Bay, N. Zealand
December 6 1865
My dear Hooker
	About a month back I wrote you a note from Wellington, which I hope you will duly receive. I returned to this place soon after, and hoped to have got ready for this Mail hence, a few more curious Crypts. I had collected at Wellington. It seems however as if I always returned to my (so-called) “home” to be laid up – the day of my arrival I was attacked with a fearful cold, leaving the worst cough I have ever had (excepting perhaps the Hooping C. – of some 15 years back,) so that what with the cough, – the meeting constituents, and attending to accounts, & back correspondence – I have not found time or strength to carry out my hopes & wishes. I hope & intend to do so by next Mail hence. Meanwhile I send you the enclosed jottings & happy shall I be if they prove of any service. 
	I have enclosed a little Fern – a Trichomanes, which I got from Ravines near Wellington. I cannot reconcile it with T. Colensoi, (as described by you & figured & described by your ever-to-be-lamented father) – it differs, in being 2-pinnate & pinnæ & segments flabelliform, involucres curiously half-winged (or spuriously segmented) between the involucre & the rachis, mouth more dilated, receptacle (when exserted) very much shorter. I have not a sp. &c. of T. Colensoi handy; and have named it T. Mantelli, in honor of Mantell, near whose residence it was obtained; plenty of fronds, but only few in fruit. Growing on the earth; sides of watercourses. If new, pray allow my Ms. name to remain, as I do not think any of our plants bear M’s name, and he deserves some recognition: albit he is dreadfully lazy!
	I am sure there are many new things about Wellington; I gathered lots of leafing specimens of Phænogams which were unknown to me but I could not meet w. any in flowers. I expect they are not flowering now, but I hope to have a try at them again. 
	As you have been so seriously ill yourself, & have met with such a sad & severe loss, I do not expect to see your 2nd part of the “Manual” till mid-summer 1866 – & therefore I hope I shall be in time with my few odds & ends by next Mail. 
	This day I received from headquarters the official letter to commence the Maori-English Lexicon on the vote of the House – present allowance (ad interim) £200 pr. ann. to include travellg. expenses – but a sum to be placed on estimates for the work, at next meeting of Parliamt. This will do. – I shall now hope to set about my work con amore; & hope I may be permitted to finish it – which I estimate will take 7 years. I purpose travelling every summer, in little (or un-) known parts, I hope to find a few novel things for you. In short, this is the pleasing part of the work – the rest is dry, but I like it. 
	There has recently been a vessel or two at Auckland Islands, where you were, looking up some shipwrecked folk. It was a good opportunity for Hector (or someone) visiting those Islands, & Bounty Island, but I fear no scientif. man was in those vessels. I send you a Paper or two – in that of yesterday, (Decr. 5) is the report of the voyage – they note your Pleurophyllum – 2 species: &c., &c. You will also find somewhat of my movements as ex “M.P.” and a letter or two on my bell, & full particulars of the present Maori war on the E. Coast. Perhaps the letter you may show to Mr Crawfurd. I intend writing to him by & bye. I want my Essay (on the Maori races) printed first. 
	Hoping you are quite well & hearty. 
	I am yours sincerely
		W. Colenso 	

The Exhibn. at Dunedin N.Z. have awarded me a Honorary Certif. – geological Collection. 


Memorandum of Bot. Specimens 
put up for Dr. Hooker, 
by W. Colenso, N. Zealand 1865. 

6191- to 6218 Crypts. obtained from firewood landed from small Coasting Craft on Auckland pier. 
6219-6221 Crypts obtained (growing on) Wynyard pier, ditto. 
6222. From living White Thorn, Auckland. 
6223- to 6239 On living Trees, Barrier Island (Thames)
6240- to 6247 on rocks, ditto 		ditto
6248. ?Ramalina, sp. nov., (unless yours in Fl. Antarct.,) Napier, H. Bay. 
6249. Do–––– colored var., ditto. 	ditto
6250. Do–––– sp. nov., a very pretty little sp. ditto
6251. Do–––– var., 		ditto. 
6252. Do–––– var., 		ditto. 
6253. Usnea, sp. nov., small upright growing sp. ditto. 
6254.) from dry raised Beaches, Napier, H. Bay. 
6283.) ″		″	″	″ 	 
6284. On bones of a dead whale, ditto. 
6285. On dead stem of Onion 	)
6286. On dead Poplar 		)
6287. On dead Conyza 		) in my garden
6288. On “Blue Gum” leaves 		)
6289. On peduncles of Eutelea 	)
6290. to 6360. Napier, H. Bay: var. localities
6361. to 6365. On bark of firewood – brought from Auckland. 
6366 to 6373. From dry beaches, Napier, H. Bay. 
6374. On dry Conyza stalks, in my field, ditto. 
6375. On Limestone, Napier. 
6376. to 6378. On fern stalks, (Pteris escul.) Napier. 
6379. On dead Rye grass – in my field. 
6380. to 6390. Napier, var. localities. 
6391. On apricot from my garden. 
6392. to 6399. Crypts. from Napier, H. Bay. 
6400. Cheilanthes Sparmanniana (mihi), differing from C. tenuif., & Sieb., in being very much larger, primary pinnules distinct – slightly villous. Stipes not dark (“ebeneous”) growing in dry sides of low hills, among Pteris escul., Napier. 
6401. Doodia intermedia, W.C., (I formerly sent you sps. of this plant: it is very distinct from our Northern one: – has a curious tendency to being bi-caudate, in term. pinnule!) – Napier. 
6402. Cordyline (believed to be a new sp.) from Auck. I would I had better sps. a plant, tall, stems branched, (what I saw, were 5-6 ft) & leaves 2-3ft. 
6403. Asplenium – from limestone crags miles inland from Napier: scarcely agreeing w. your Asp. Trichom, and very unlike dwg. of that plant in Newman’s Brit. Ferns. 
6404. Asplenium – growing with preceding. 
[Asplenium] 
6405. A fern from Mohaka, Hawkes Bay: – (Very like Hypolepis tenuifolia, & perhaps a var., but, to me, is a Polypodium. 
6406. From sides of a stream in the interior – 15 miles from Napier, new to me, and scarce. 
6407. From Napier: scarce – perhaps not indig. 
6408. A fine sp. of Cyrtostylis, from my field, Napier. 
6409-11. Fungi on leaves of Geranium, do. ditto. 
6412. Ditto on Epilobium ditto. 
6413. Ditto on (introduced) Composit., ditto. 
6414-6415 Ditto on Veronica – my garden, ditto. 
6416. Ditto, on Apple rind. d–––. do. 
6417. Ditto, on Linium monogynum, ditto. (? K. Lini.)
6418. Ditto, on Euphorbia glauca, Napier. 
6419. Ditto (or disease) on leaves of Myoporum, ditto.
6420. Ditto, on white clover, garden, Napier
6421. Stellaria scarcely S. parviflora: sepals not “subulate”, & peduncles longer than leaves. 
6422. Hydrocotyle ?minima, –
6423. Elatine (these last 3, from near Cape Turnagain.) 
6424. Scrap of a fern (Nephrodium) from Barrier Island. 
6425. Small Veronica, Mid. Island. 
6426. Ditto (with sep. fruit – said to be of the shrub?)
6427. Fungus on leaves of 6426. 
6428. Believed to be a new fern: Cyathea Hookeri, W.C. a very elegant sp. – from Mid. Island. 
6429. A plant of Stylideæ, – ditto. 
6430. Trichomanes – near, but (I think,) differing from, T. humile (which, you say, has “stipes winged above, margin thickened: midrib unbranched,”) – from ravines nr. Wellington; on ground (not, as that sp., on trees,): T. neglectum, W.C. 
 [Trichomanes humile]
6431. Small Nephrodium, growing with the preceding, only 2 specimens found. I send you the largest, – an sp. distinct? frond margined. 
6432. Minute brown fungus, on upper surface of leaf of Dysoxylum spectabile, which I found at Mohaka, in Hawkes Bay. 
6433. Ditto on ditto, under surface, ditto. 
6434. Ditto on Peach rind, my garden, Napier. 
6435-6441 From Mt Kaweka – ½ way between H. Bay and Taupo: alt. 5000 ft. (brought me by one of our Surveyors – but contg. nothing new). Among them a fine sp. of Sticta filicina(?) on ground. 
6442 to 6448. From dry beaches near Napier. 
6449. to 6450. On living Myoporum lætum, ditto, ditto. 
6451. to 6454. From dry raised Beaches, near Napier. 
6455. to 6472. From old fences of my field, Napier; on wood of Podocarpus Totara. 
6473. to 6475 On posts of Vitex littoralis, my field, Napier. 
6476. to 6483 On rails of Leptospermum, ditto ditto. 
6484. On Myrsine bark, firewood, Mid. Island. 
6485. On dead wood – Beach, Napier. 
6486. to 6489 From dry raised Beaches, Napier. 
6490. A peculiar little green bladdery plant, on soil, yard, Napier: – found in winter. 
6491. to 6502 Various Lichens, Jung. &c. on soil, Scinde Island, Napier. 
6503. to 6504 Two elegant Cladoniæ, from ditto. 
6505. Cladonia, w. spotted thallus (spermozones), which interested me much – from own field. 
6506. to 6509 Cladonia, from raised beach, Napier. 
6510. Cladonia, from among fern, Napier, scarce. 
6511. Cladonia ?pyxidata – ditto. 
6512. to 6514. Cladonia, Scinde Island, Napier. 
6515. to 6518. Sundry lichenes & Mosses, from Napier. 
6519. Fungus, on leaf of Bay tree, Garden, ditto. 
6520. Small Parasite, on thallus of Peltigera, ditto. 
6521. to 6527. Fungi & Lichenes, from Napier. 
6528. Callitriche, found between Auckland and Bay of Islands, & sent to me in a letter. The person has sent me 1 sp. of a moss, without ptra, & which I think will prove a new Dawsonia, unless it may be, D. polytrichoides, Jackson, though larger. 
      N. B. Agaricus cornatus, Müll., is a nat. of the Hawkes Bay. 

Wm. Colenso. 

For Dr. J. D. Hooker
&c &c &c
Memo. of specimens sent to Dr. Hooker, Jany. 1866

Nos. 6530 	)   Lichens, from littoral rocks
     to    	)   S. side of Wellington harbour. 
  6550.	)
6551. Jungermannia – with ditto. 
6552. Fungus on dead Hymenanthera. 
6553,	)
   to    	)   from hills nr. Wellington. 
6559.	)
6560. Shrub from Hawke’s Bay. 
6561. Veronica Hulkiana? from my garden. 
6562. Shores of Wellington harbour. 
6563. Plant from Canterbury
(Certainly introduced) 

W.C. 
 # 


5 January 1866
Napier, Hawke’s Bay. 
	N. Zealand, January 5th 1866
My dear Hooker
	Although it will be nearer Lady- than New Year’s day when this reaches you, I can not refrain from heartily wishing you “a happy New Year”, (just as you & your comrades wished each other when in these S. Seas some ¼ a century ago). And in doing so I do it with a double amount of good hearty feeling, (or I am much mistaken,) as yesterday I saw in the “Illustrated News,” that you were Director at Kew; and so I have w. much pleasure directed a small parcel of Lichens for you this day – which I send by this Mail to Wellington to Mr Under-Secy. Gisborne, to be by him franked & forwarded, as was the last (the Kumara) which I hope safely & soundly reached you. 
	I hope my dear Hooker you are long ere this, re-established in health; & that all is bright & cheerful around you. –
	Your being rightly & properly made “Director” – and somewhat of my own present battling here with a small Scotch clique (as regards the coming Election) reminds me forcibly of an event in your life some 20 years ago. – I trust you have proved – are proving – and will prove – it is all right and all for the best – your not then going to the “Land of Cakes”. 
	I wrote to you last month, and I think I must have told you, the present Ministry have –(unasked) given me the work of writing the Maori-Eng. Lexicon; the present salary £200., but to include travelling expenses (still it will do); so I hope to do some more for you yet, though not this year. The job will be heavy & long (to do it well) but I like hard work. If peace prevails, I hope to be at Taupo in the autumn – a truce, will do for me. 
	The few things I send you now are mostly Lichens, & nearly all from Wellington. No. 6560, is a specimen of a small shrubby tree – a shrub, – which appears different from any in your Manual – though near Eurybia albida: it grows here sparingly, in dry soil. No. 6563 has puzzled me much. Mr Fitzgerald of Canterbury sent it to me last week in a letter wishing to know its name, &c., – saying it was tolerably plentiful there, on one of the upland “Runs”. – I am utterly ignorant of it, in fact I think it is incomplete & imperfect, but as I wished to send it to you I would not tear it to pieces. Do let me know what it is – and whether you have had it before. 
	In looking into your “Manual”, I think I have noticed one or two additional errata which require correcting: –
§. p.122, line 11 from bottom, “not” should be omitted. 
§. p.161, “Senecio glastifolius, – perfectly glabrous branched woolly shrub”. –
§. In your Sections (Compositæ) p.122, 1. Asteroideæ.: 2. Senecionideæ. 3. Cichoraceæ; would (I venture to think) have been better, for our tyros, if explained. If you have any §ns., such as of Jungermannia, in your 2nd part, I hope you will explain them. I hope I am in time with these Lichens – and that some of them will be of service. A few are I think new to me – I can send you more (if required) of any No. now sent. –
	If not too much trouble, let me know them by their numbers. I have yet much to do (in the performance of promises) in the way of naming Cryptog. collection, &c. here. –
	My cough & cold is better – thanks to God, & to medicines, some of which (Conium & Quinine) I still take: weather fine rather too dry here just now; a glorious climate this of Hawke’s Bay. –
	Hector is at the N. (Bay of Islands & elsewhere) inspecting coal fields – what the slow coaches are doing at Otago in the way of printing our Essays I cannot imagine: –
	Believe me,
	My dear Hooker
	Very Sincerely yours
		Wm Colenso. 
PS: Very likely by next Mail or so, I shall want you to introduce me to Mr Crawfurd – I wish to write to him on the N.Z. language & people, &c. – The Bp. of Natal mentioned his name to me in a letter, & so has a Mr Thomson of Dunedin. 
 # 


3 March 1866 
Napier, Hawke’s Bay
	N. Zealand, March 3 /66
Dear Hooker
	I have your two letters and as usual overflowing w. kindness – before me, of Nov. 7 and Dec 4: the best New Year’s gift I have recd. I suppose such will never occur again by 2 consecutive Mails. Right glad am I to find you were well, & that the kumara had reached you all right! Be assured (if I live) I will send you the Taro (Caladium – 2 species) and other Kumara: also, if possible, Dendrobium & Bolbophyllum, but the N. is the place for Dendrob. – it is very very scarce S. of Thames. 
	Let your Curator make out a complete list of desiderata – plants (N.Z.) not in Engd. or Kew and try to get from headquarters, all Bot. packages (suitable sizes) free of postage by Mail: it is a bore to have to beg the folks here to “frank”, & postage if pd. by W.C., is rather heavy. I have the “Icones” complete; also the “Tour in Iceland” (this latter doubly precious, as you took it to S. Pole (or Mt. Erebus, & gave it to W.C. in Bay of Islands.) Many thanks for the Linn. “Transactions”, you have sent for me to Dixon, also for those you procured for W.C., & for all the trouble you have been at on my account. I am, however, pretty sure I owe you for some former outlay. (I have not your old letter handy) which I must rout out by next Mail – when I shall also send for best illustd. work on British Mosses (or European?) & remit for all I owe. I should like to get a good authentic spn. or two of Hymenophyllum Tunbridgense, & H. unilaterale: could you not get them looked up & forwarded?
	Dr. Hector is away at the N. routing up “treading in my old steps” (as our aborigs. say). He tells me, he can find nothing new – but I think he will: I only wish he had told me of his going – I could have pointed out some marked nooks & localities, for plants, which I (we) still wish to get: he has written to me 2ce. en route. He had thought he had got a new “pine”, but it will prove Dacrydm. Colensoi. (I still believe the little Taupo gem of a tree (which I sent you “root & Branch”) to be different from the D. Colensoi of the N.) I hear nothing yet of the “Essays” – which, to me, (seeing how they hurried me) is provoking: I believe the good Scotch commee. have latterly found fault with some of my “notes” (from old visitors) and remarks as being too free. I refused to alter: said, they could cut them out, if they please to do so, or return me my Essay – I would take it back, & charge them nothing. I believe they are going on with it, as I saw some pps. printed – of the 2nd printing!!
	Herewith I send you a few specns. nearly all of which came to me in letters from correspondents, so you must make allowance. Two or three of them are quite new to me:-
No. 6564. prima facie, resembles Aphelia of Tasmania. 
               (new to me). 
6565.	Sent as a “water plant” – also new to me. 
6566.	I think I must have sent you. 
6567-6569 Ditto. 
6570	Very peculiar & scarcely indig. “found among loose scoria Mount Smart, near Auckland” no fl. no ft. 
6571	Better spns. of the Metrosideros I sent you while at Wellington; it seems near M. lucida (from descript., I have no sps. of lucida) & yet it does not wholly agree – or rather possesses 1 or 2 chars. not mentioned as pertaining to that sp. If it should prove new, or you shld care to mention it in appendix to Manual, just mention Hon. J.B. Acland of Canterbury as having bought it to notice. I like Mr Acland, & he wishes to do something in Botany (although marrd. & family, & not over rich) besides he has been at a little expense &c. – which is marvellous here, among this money grubbing Mammon worshippg. community. 
6572. 	Is a curious thread-like Fungus found too commonly in our garden pots: – I should like to know what it is. I had thought it might have some connection with the roots of potted plants: but in the pot I took this from – nothing has grown, the seeds having failed. 
You are right. Dr Hector is a very superior man & a nice fellow: is he a Scotchman? I know not: if he is, he is wonderfully different from the many. Some rascals have lately robbed their young Col. Museum at Wellington, & all the valuables gone, Hector & Mantell will be chief losers: Govt. has offered £200 reward. 
	I fear I shall not go to Wellington again shortly. Our election here comes off in a fortnight and I expect to be beaten (pleasant!) but my opponent is the Superintendent of the Province – so the race is not a fair one. –
	Hoping you & yours are quite well – that some of the Crypts. sent may be of use, that Her. Ma. will also make you Sir Jos as well as Director – and that you may long enjoy life & all its honors. 
	I am – yours sincerely
		William Colenso 
 # 


30 July 1866
Napier, New Zealand
July 30, 1866. 
Dear Hooker,
	I have just finished packing 2 small boxes of Roots for you: – 1. of Caladium, 3 or 4 vars. (according to Natives); and 1, of Kumara, 2 old vars. from these parts. (Hawkes Bay). The last lot of Kumara sent being from Doubtless Bay near the N. Cape. I hope to send you some better & vastly more striking vars of Kumara, by & bye. I have had some trouble in getting the Caladium roots, (owing to war & colonization), but I shall wholly lose all thoughts of the latter, if these reach you safely. I send them hence to Dr Hector (Wellington) on the 1st proxo. who will frank and forward them. ––
	I duly recd. your very kind note of Mar 23, – and lost no time in informing Dr Hector of your wish for seeds of Senecio rotundif. (a S. plant I have never seen) and he has just informed me that he has got a plant from Otago for you, which he will send with some other things. ––
	Dr Eccles (Dunedin) has also informed me that he sent to you & to Dr Seamann, each, a copy of my Botan. Brochure. – I hope you got it: we have not yet seen it! All the “Essays” are still unpublished!! what a bore! after being so dreadfully hurried for the Mss. copies!! – I had written to Dr Eccles, asking him to send you & Dr S. a copy, hoping you might receive it before the breaking up of your Botanl. Congress – of which meeting I hope to hear, & have thought much of. 
	Since my last to you (in March, I think) I have received some specimens of plants, “growing close to the glaciers” Sth. Island, – but mostly too imperfect, and too badly preserved to trouble you with. There were 3 or 4 novelties in the lot – one a Ranunculus, not far from R. pinguis, but distinct from any you have described – have sent for more & better specimens. – I have also had a lot of plants from the N. – and among them is the large leaved sp., (or var.) of Mida (Santalum) of fine fruit. (Mira undulata, p.84 of my “Journey” or “Excursion”;) I have written for larger & more sps of it to send to you. 
	I have no doubt you have had a vast amount of trouble with the 2nd Vol. of our Flora (Manual) but I hope it will be of vast service here, & so your labours will not have been in vain. The Genl. Assy. is now sitting, and if they pass (in the Estimates) a small salary for your humble servant, you may depend on my endeavour to serve you with lots of Monocotyls. from the interior, &c. – I hope to take the field in the coming summer. 
	I should have written to Crawfurd but I await my Essay!! when it will be ready I cannot say. Let me hear from you about the Caladium roots now cut: also what N.Z. plants are still a desiderata with you. I will do all that I can to get you the Cordyline. 
	I am, my dear Hooker,
		Yours truly,
			Wm Colenso. 
 # 


29 June 1867
Napier June 29/67
Dear Hooker
	I hasten to send you a few new seeds of our N.Z. Gourd – called by the Natives – Huë (pronounced, Hooay). I really don’t know to which (if to any) of D’Candolles genera of Cucurbitaceæ it belongs: its seeds are very different to those of any genus of Cucurbit. known to me. I hope they will grow: the plant likes a sandy soil. –
	I also send a few other new seeds very lately to hand, which may be desiderata. 
	Senecio Huntii, from the Chatham Islands; – said, by my correspondent, “to grow in swamps”. 
	Corokia, from same place which may be a different plant to Cunningham’s C. Buddleioides. 
	Coprosma crassifolia, mihi, from Manukau near Auckland. – not, I think, noticed by you but see Tasmanian Journal vol. ii. p.289, for a descript, I think it a very distinct sp. 
	Hypoxis pusilla (of your HandBook) but, I think, certainly differing from the Tasmn. plant, and possibly a distinct sp. 
	I have recd. several kind notes &c, from you, to all which I purpose replying by next Mail. 
	I have been very unwell & have suffered much since I last wrote to you. 
	I put up these in haste to go by this mail, having recently got from a good source the Gourd seeds, which I forward without delay. I hope to have a good account from you of this plant. The original cultivated plants of the New Zealanders will yet aid largely in telling their tale,
	The gourd does well in sandy soil. 
		Believe me,
		Ever sincerely yours
		Wm Colenso. 
 # 


14 November 1867

Napier, N. Zealand, November 14, 1867
My Dear Hooker,
	I trust you have been so fully occupied w. everyway better correspondents, that you have not noticed my (seeming) neglect. I rose this morning and cleared my table for action, determined to put off no longer writing to you (which I ought to have done long ago if only to acknowledge your kindness). 
	I have now before me your 3 letters of May 27, and Novr 19/66, & Jany 30/67: a list of the Lichens (more recently sent to you by me) named by Leighton: a Copy of your Lecture on Insular Floras; ditto of the Report of Royal Gardens Kew for 1866, – a copy of Part ii of HandBook N.Z. Flora, – and to crown the whole, a photograph of yourself. – My writing table is literally covered w. your kind remembrances – every one crying out, “Fie!” for my neglect: and what have I to say? Listen:–
	In Aug. /66 I was suddenly attacked with malignant Whitlow (or something worse) in bulbous part of forefinger right hand. For 6 days & nights I was nearly mad and eventually became delirious; I begged & prayed our surgeons day after day to lay it open – they would not, saying they could not see where to cut (it was red swollen & stiff throughout), but on the 6th day, when I was beside myself and the disorder up to my elbow, they did so – it gave immediate relief but I have lost the use of my finger! I was months poulticing, &c, &c, and I got very low & haggard; and now my finger is healed rigid (anchylosis). I think I must have informed you, that I had lost the writing & drawing use of my right thumb 4 years ago, and now my index finger has followed suit; so I had to learn to write with my mid. & ring fingers, and I have managed this also, thank GOD! Of course for 6 months I could do but very little towards my opus magnum, Lexicon: so I was obliged to work w. a will to make up for leeway, – this then is my excuse, and it has been a terrible reality with me, but is now among the many ugly things of the past, save as to its effects which I shall ever feel. –
In July last I sent you (through Dr. Hector) a few seeds which I thought might be of service: there were seeds of our N.Z. Gourd, – of Hypoxis ?pusilla, – of Coprosma, Crassifolia (from near Auckland) of Senecio Huntii and of a Corokia from the Chathams. I wrote, I think, a few lines w. them. I hope you got them, and that they were living and will succeed. ––
I will now jot a few notes on your remarks, and reply to your queries: –
“May 27/66.” – “I will send a list of the N.Z. things we especially want.” Not yet to hand. (But Dr. Hector, who spent an hour with me here last week, in his way on to Taupo and interior Gold Hunting, told me, they had several plant cabins filled ready to go by nt. ship to you, – so I hope you will have many desiderata from him.) –
“Novr. 19/66.” – I regret the Colocasia tubers rotted, I had misgivings about them when I sent them, because I feared they had been put up too late. I lost the last season, but I will try not to lose this coming one. You observe – “Hector tells me of a Ti that is cultivated for the food yielded by its trunk.” About 15-17 years ago I sent you sps. of its leaves, and told you then what I knew of it. I have cultivated it ever since 1845, and have now 10-15 plants in my garden here, but it has never flowered. It throws up a thick cabbage like stem, 4-5 feet high, rarely quite straight, with bark much smoother than any of its congenors, producing both suckers and shoots in plenty from root & stem, which grow readily when taken off and planted out. I never saw but this one plant, which in ’45 I obtained from an old Native cultivation in this neighbourhood; but the old Natives generally knew it well, and have often when in my garden asked me for it to cook & eat as a bonne bouche, with every symptom of mouth watering over it! I have frequently enquired of them (in former years) respecting it – all knew of it as a thing of the past, (like, alas! many of their natural productions, e.g. Brownsonettia, &c., &c.) and I have heard it is still (or was) to be found at Maungatautari, and at Upper Whanganui. But having the living plant flourishing, I made sure of its flowering some day. Now that I have several, I shall keep down all the suckers & shoots (save the terminal one) of one of my best plants, & so try to get it to flower. My original one died long ago: it seems to get to a certain height, 4-5 feet, then throw out suckers, &c., then the parent dies off. I have often had thoughts as to its being really indigenous, certainly not (I should say) of this N. Island. All the other Tiis are eaten by the Natives, – roots & blanched heart leaves; the large species (C. australis) is a perfect stand-by, or staff of life, in famine, as I have known & proved; but it is terrible labour to dig up its long tap root! I am almost sure you have 2 sp. under C. Banksii, as my sps. to you from Ruahine & elsewhere, are of a plant that is never arboreous. I think I know 6 good species, if not 7, all N. Island ones. –
“Jan. 30/67.” This note merely covers Leighton’s List of Lichens, for which I thank you and him much. It is not so complete as I could have wished, as in nearly half the specimens, he merely gives the genus, which I mostly knew before. Still it will be very useful. –
I prize your photograph greatly and thank you much for sending it. I cannot however reconcile it with yourself – i.e. as you were in 1840: I look at it again and again, and think of the S. Pole, and 100 other matters! –
I admire your Lecture on Insular Floras, which I have read w. much satisfaction; there are a few matters therein I should like to remark on, but I cannot touch on them now. Your Kew Garden Report has also gratified me: how I should like to see Kew! I note, printed on the envelope enclosing the said Report – “Any communication in reply to enclosed to be addressed to the First Commissioner, &c.” – but why I cannot divine. However, I have nothing to reply, save thanks and to say I am glad to find Kew is thrown open on Sundays. 
	Your 2nd Part of HandBook, I confess I cannot say much about; for, up to the present, I have only very casually dipped into it: partly from its having but little more than what I had already in the 4to. Flora: partly from my not receiving the names according to the Nos. of my own Crypts formerly sent to you (which I had hoped to be able to obtain) and partly owing to my neglecting everything in order to get on with my Lexicon. (If, by so doing, I may indeed propitiate the powers!). I have been importuned from all sides for Crypt. sps. named, in way of exchanges, &c. (last mail even from Ceylon,) but I have done nothing from want of numbered names: as the fixed state of my finger, and constant occupation of my time (not now my own) entirely precludes my carefully & slowly investigating, &c. &c. I would still gladly pay a good price for such a list accurately made from the Hookerian Herbarium. If you should ever fall in w. any. Crypt. Botanist (poor but able) to whom you could entrust such a job, I would gladly pay him for doing it. – And, lest you should think it rather strange, or that I am getting cold towards Botany, I should tell you, that I have very great difficulty with the Govt. (or, rather, w. Mr Richmond, the gentleman who is now over the so-called Native Department, who was formerly my political foe), and w. the House about this said Lexicon. They tried hard during this late session to knock off the Vote, notwithstanding Mr Stafford (Premier) saying, he could not agree to it, – that it was in accordance w. a Resolution of the House, – that it would not be honourable, – that it was of the nature of a contract extending over several years, – and that he knew of no reason why the work should not, or could not, be executed by me, &c. &c. Mr Richmond said, it was unfortunate for the House, the Lexicon was in my hands, that I could not do it – a waste of money, &c, – that he had seen some of my writings for the Dunedin Exhibition which were not “literature” (sic) at all! &c. And since the prerogation I have been officially informed, that a gentleman (who knows nothing of Maori) has been specially appointed to inspect & report as to “substantial progress” (as if it were a House or Barn!) – and that “doubts exist as to any vote being taken after the end of this financial year” (June/68). But – aid or no aid from Govt. – I still hope to get on w. my work. Not a single Govt. official has ever replied to (or acknowledged) one of my letters asking for local information! although 20 months ago (before Mr R. came into office) they were directed in the Gazette to do so. ––
I should also tell you (lest you should, rightly enough, suppose that I know of more of your and of other Botanical Publications than I really do,) that I have not received a copy of any of the Linn. Society’s Serials, since I became a member. – No fault whatever (as far as I know) of any of the Society’s Officers, but my own, or my Agents’ (Dixon), as I gave him the Order to receive all such, and I have not since ordered goods from him, and had told him not to send Books by Post: no doubt they are accumulating at Dixon’s. I have not written to him for 2 years!
By this mail, I send you a little Book parcel containing 3 copies of my Essay on Bot. of N. Island, (out of 12 received from Hector,) – one copy of which is for yourself (or for any friend of yours) and two for the Linnaean Society, if you will kindly present them for me. Hector tells me, my 2nd Essay (on the Maories) is to be shortly printed at Govt. Press. I wish it were now ready, as I think it contains some curious information. Or rather I wish I had not written it so hurriedly, – or that I now had it to do, with time at my disposal. ––
Haast (w. whom I correspond) sent me a long memorandum from Mr Darwin of enquiries, respecting the Maories. I told Haast I would try to reply to it; – but I wait the printing of the said Essay, as Darwin would find some of them anticipated therein. – would you mind telling Mr Darwin this!
Of course you will have heard from Hector of the handsome piece of furniture which has been made for you from our choicest N.Z. woods; he tells me it is ready, and will go by fast ship. I was to have visited Wellington to have seen it, &c, &c, but could not get away. I was very glad Hector timely remembered me about it, as I should have been really sorry to hear of any such thing having been got up by your Botanical friends and admirers for you, and (perhaps) your oldest acquaintance here omitted.
With this letter, or in the Book parcel, I shall send you a few specimens, mostly of parasitical Crypts. (Fungi) for Mr Berkeley’s inspection, also an Orchis, &c. To me, they appear novel. I hope they may prove such. 
Have you seen a little work called “Castaway on the Auckland Isles”? published by Lockwood & Co. I sent for it, and have been marvellously disappointed. What a golden opportunity the fellow must have had, during a whole year’s sojourn, to have done much for science, if he had but the nous! He speaks of certain plants, and among others of “a root which is very abundant all over the Island, and it is very good food, it makes a very good substitute for bread and potatoes. There is also a great deal of sugar, in it. – we intend to make sugar from it”. (p.17.) – and of “a plant, good as greens, especially in soup, found also in plenty on Campbell’s Island,” – and of small “red berries which are very good of which the birds are very fond. – I am reserving some seeds”, – I have no doubt “but with cultivation they may be made a very nice fruit.” (p. 40)
Our local papers have stated (as from “the Gardeners’ Chronicle”) that a Hippeastrum has been discovered in N.Z. Do you know anything of it?
I am scarcely surprised at the variegated var. of Phormium making a little noise in England, I only marvel it did not long ago. Do you recollect seeing a fine plant of it which grew in my garden in the Bay of Islands? Dr Knight took away 2 or 3 plants from my garden here, last year, for himself and Sir G. Grey; it is certainly beautiful. 
How does Arthropodium cirrhatum thrive with you in cultivation? here in my garden (without any manure) it flourishes remarkably, so that Hector and others did not recognise it. It is a most striking plant, growing like a huge tussock – leaves 4¼ in. wide, & 4½ feet long, panicle & stem 4 to 4½ feet; flowers 1¼ to 1⅓ diameter; while outside the garden, among the fern, its orig. habitat, it keeps its common S. size, which, however, is much larger than the Bay of Islands plant. I have a suspicion it may have a distinct sp. Its perianth is not “foliolis lanceolatis longe acuminatis” – the 3 inner leaflets being very obtuse, almost semicircular at apex. In the Hand. B. you say, “Filaments 2-glandular at base”, but I don’t understand this, unless its 2 long & curled appendages are glands. But I’ll dry some sps & send. ––
Have you ever noticed the Cotyledons of the Ngaio (Myoporum lætum)? they are densely pilose! as well as spotted like the leaves, & colored at margin. Strange that such a very glabrous plant should have pilose Cotyledons. ––
I had a plant of Abelia uniflora which had opposite leaves, it threw up two suckers as from its roots, which grew into long branches, one had 3 leaves, and the other 4 leaves, regular & verticillate throughout! In flowering and in bracteas it did not accord with D’Candolle’s description. ––
Well, now my Dear Hooker, I trust I hear you say that I have made up in quantity for my lack. I have given you nearly all this day, & my hand is aching roundly. ––
Let me have a line from you now and then – or a copy of a Lecture, a Report, or something of that kind bearing your name. –
Below is a memo of the few things now sent – which are either here (enclosed) or in the Book Packet. –
	And Believe me
		Ever sincerely Yours
			Wm. Colenso. 

No. 6574. Orchis: Chiloglottis?
6575. Small plant, from Wairoa Falls. 
6576. Ripe fruiting sps. of Hepaticæ, sent before. (not 
          sent). 
6577. A small Gymnogramme, which I suspect may prove distinct from G. leptophylla! growing here among ferns. I have no sps., of G. leptophylla handy for comparison.
6578. Leaves of Hypoxis? pusilla, leaves channelled & minutely serrulate, fruit not narrow below, &c. – (No flower or fruit.)
6579. Fungus on leaves of Myoporum lætum. 
6580. Ditto (Brown) on white clover. 
6581. Ditto curious (light orange) on ditto. 
6582. Ditto on Cherry Tree Bark. 

15th. I have enclosed in Book parcel 3 or 4 flowers of Arthropodium – 1 small Bract. 
 # 
29 November 1867
Napier, N.Z. 
Nov. 29/67


My Dear Hooker
I wrote to you by last mail hence via Suez, & now I have yours of Sept 27 (received here in less than 2 months!). which I hasten to thank you for, & to reply to you – some more of those Cucurbitaceæ seeds – which, I am sure, are now living, & hope may grow w. you, & fare better. 
I have written to you (in my last) pretty fully about the Cordyline (?edulis) – and if you have my old Mss. or letters, you will, no doubt, find more. In this sp. it is the whole of the stem which is eaten – much as the Sago-like pith of the large tree – Fera (C. medullaris) –
I hope you will make something of the orchid I sent you, I have no doubt it is a n sp. of Chiloglottis. I have since received living (rather half rotten) sps. from Kirk & on dissecting found enough – as the labellum has 8 glandular excrescences (9 in one) – is this char. to be depended on? – interior petals longer & linear lanceolate, & its leaves obtuse; &c. &c. – But you will (no doubt) find all this & more, in what I sent you. –
I have written, more for (& to) Kirk, during the last 2 years, than I have for any other priv. person – he too being wholly unknown to me. I have named a large lot of N.Z. scraps he sent me, & encouraged him in every way. (He is very poor & struggling.)  He wrote to me about the Phyllocladus (my alpine one is also glaucous) & I am to have specimens by & bye – I think K. is gone to the islets off E. Coast, – & I expect he will obtain something for you. – I fear Dr Hector is too early for Phænogams – it has been cold since he left & there is now plenty of snow on Ruahine. –
Sir G. Grey is out: & if you are well acquainted w. our new Governor (who is said to be a patron of the sciences & a scholar) say a word about my work – Lexicon. I fear, from what I can learn, that those Grocers  (I have said “Grocers” – but I fear a certain Ecclesiastical party – out of the Ho. – is more mischievous!) in the Ho. (who have all the say about money matters) may succeed in striking it off next year (June) – unless the new Governor supports it –
I write in great haste. Try to understand me – & ever
		Believe me. Most sincerely yours, 	Wm Colenso. 	

 # 


22 October 1869
Napier, October 22. /69
My Dear Hooker
Going to P. Off. to post a few letters I found yours of Aug 6: and glad was I to see your well-known writing and doubly so in finding that Hector had sent you a copy of the Institute Proceedings and that you approved of my paper therein on the Natives. Of course, you know it was not written for it; and you may rightly enough wonder at not receiving a copy from me direct. I will tell you. In 1863, the essay on Bot. (N.I.) was allotted to me, that I finished. In Decr. while at Auckland (“Parlt.”), 4 or 5 of the Commissioners came to me to get out also the Essay on the Natives – as Dr Shortland, (who was to do it) had left N.Z. without, &c. &c. I said, no: at last I gave way upon repeated solicitations on their part – and their allowing me 2 months, instead of one: I was also to have 50 copies. I returned to Napier in Jany. & set to work, & before the end of Feby/64, sent it to Dunedin having written it wholly (with copious notes) in 5-6 weeks. 
Then came thanks; then a request I would alter a few paragraphs, this I refused, saying, they might do so. After some fighting there, I believe, between the True Blue (orthodox) about it – it was put into type and printed in proof beyond 100 pages!!! and then broken up (ostensibly) to be re-set in a larger size: this was never done by them. Dr Hector & others got it recently printed among the Instit. Papers (as you see), but they omitted the Notes which were curious & valuable. They had originally intended to include them in the first ed. (see scrap of proof of that enclosed). Hector sent me a copy – I asked about the notes and the 50 copies. Reply: no funds to execute the first; and second, none to be had. Then I tried to purchase a few copies of the single Essay; this was also refused, unless I took the whole Vol. 18!! Then I wrote to Dr Hector, asking if copies would be sent to Sir G. Grey, yourself, & Mr Darwin, – he replied, yes, and this eased my mind. 
By this time there were many applications for that one essay, and the Wellington Printer saw Hector about it, who at first refused him permission to reprint it, then wrote to me, if I would furnish additions, &c., he would see it through the press as there was a great demand! I said, I could not find time to do all I wished; – but to reprint it w. the notes: then H. replied he feared the notes were lost!
Now however that you write to me about it, I will be at H. again immediately, and if I cannot get the Ms. notes from him, will re-write them, so as to be ready by next mail hence to Engl. I am very willing it should be reprinted there, but I could add largely to it – having much more of evidence as to antiquity of this Polyn. people &c. &c. My closer studies for the last 3 years, in their language (the old half obsolete,) traditions, myths, sacred formularies, &c, &c, – have given me convincing proofs. But I almost fear I shall never have time to give to science, my bundle of many gleanings. 
This Dictionary is heavy – almost too heavy for any one unassisted man: Sir G. Grey gave me to understand I was to have every assistance, & time ample. – I am goaded about it, and now am ordered appy. to finish it by April 1/70 (absit omen) – after which no more pay will be forthcoming – all right!
I gave Sir G. Grey a copy of the first printed proof, of that Essay to, I think, 88 pages, on his leaving for England, of course, you saw him there. 
I close in haste for mail this aftn. but will write to you again by next mail. 
			Ever believe me,
			My dear Hooker
			Yours Sincerely
			W Colenso

I send you 2 papers, in one you will see my Cook’s Centenary Paper: & you will have an acct. of our last fight – or murder – attacking party 8-10 to one! & far better armed: the poor “Hauhaus” – I believe had no other alternative but to stand & die – we have no war. 
 # 


23 November 1869
Napier, N. Zealand,
Nov. 23, 1869
J. D. Hooker, M.D., Esq.,
Director, B. Gardens &c &c
Kew, London. 

My Dear Hooker,
	
Mine to you of 22nd ult. will have caused you to expect something from me by this month’s mail. With this I send you a packet (registered) being my only single copy of the Essay on the Natives, with all the notes, & wanting appendix, in Ms. – I send you my copy, in order that you may have the proper places of the notes indicated, together with a few typos! corrections marked, – and that you may keep in your Libr. your own presentation copy. There are a few other little typos. & other small matters (Italics, &c) I should like to have attended to, but I have not had time. I have had to work hard to get the Ms. ready for you – partly owing to Hector’s not replying quickly, though he did at last by telegram (he having telegd. to his old chum at Dunedin (Dr. Eccles) about the missing notes, & was waiting his reply – which after all, through Dr E. being away he did not get). Hector says “They are lost”. These sent are an exact true copy. 
And now, I hope you & Profr. Huxley will get it printed in its entirety. And as you liked the Essay, I hope to hear you will approve of the notes: a few items therein will, I think, interest you. At the same time I leave it to you to omit any portions you may think proper. Be sure you don’t laugh too loud at my musical notes – I mean, the writing of them. I don’t know how you intend to get it printed, – in some serial, or alone; but if possible I should like to get, say, 50 copies, I paying for them. Indeed 2, or 300 or more, would sell, readily here (as I learn from Hector.) And in the event of its being printed, separately, or your getting me my 50 copies done up separately, may I further trouble you to present to L.S. a couple of copies in my name?
Having written so much, I cannot give you any more time just now because mail, too, being about making up. But I will just say – that when I originally wrote this Essay, or rather the two, (1st  being on the Bot. of the N. Island, N.Z.) I had intended on their being then printed, to have asked you to do me another kind office (which you had indeed volunteered your part ) –– viz. to get me elected a Fellow of Royal S., – but the non-printing of this Essay on the Natives kept me from moving in the matter; and I subsequently thought I would put it off until my N.Z. Lexicon should be finished. But as this work is, I fear, to be hurriedly brought to a close, (having been Offy. informed that it must be so by April 1/70 – absit omen!), and will therefore not be fully what I had sketched & hoped – perhaps, in your getting this Essay printed &c. in England; it would be a good time for you to do so. I just mention this to you, use your own judgment in the matter. (I see Hector, Haast & others have become Fellows during the last few years.) – As to all expenses, they shall be immy. remitted with thanks. 
In one respect, I shall not greatly regret the premature closing of the N.Z. Lexicon, – as it will afford me a little time, which I have not now, and which I really want, – and so enable me to get out a few more (curious and interesting) things, concerning this ancient ill-used people : I may, however, feel the cutting off of all govt pay.
We have no wai now, nor likely to have any. I have lately been defending Lecky (in our locals), against attacks of Bp. Williams upon him as Atheist, &c (the old Cuckoo Cry!) as yet, however, only defensive & slightly skirmishing. – Folks must be taught to be careful of what they do recklessly (?ignorantly) assert. How I have smiled (?laughed) at Archdeacon Freeman’s notion about the Cherubum! Is it by such rubbish that “Orthodoxy” is to be dropped & buttressed! – Allons. 
	Believe me,
		Ever my dear friend
			Yours sincerely
				W Colenso
 # 



11 November 1877
Napier, New Zealand
November 11, 1877
Dear Hooker
Really I hardly know how to begin a letter to you! It is so long since I wrote – I have so many things to speak of, or write about, – and then, your time! Do not for a moment think I have forgotten you – that can never be. I have often of late (during past 12 months) been thinking of you, and your doings, old & new, – and, indeed had quite believed I should have written to you pretty fully before this. For, last year, I had planned doing a little in the way of our ferns: – believing that I had gained 3-4 more species; and wishing to clear up a little concerning those already known, (and so I had told Kirk in a letter) & had sent to England for some additional Books of reference (viz. Synopsis Filicum last Edn., Smith’s Historia Filicum, Van de Busch: Hymenophyllm. of Java, Beddowe’s Ferns of S. India, & Presl & Mettenius Hymenophyll., &c., &c.) hoping to receive them by the beginning of our N.Z. winter; which term I was looking forward to passing – at all events pleasingly – w. my Books & specimens. But the fates again were not propitious. (Did I thoughtlessly omit my offering of a cake or my libation of honey & wine?)
The books were duly shipped in “Queen Bee” w. many other val. Books for our branch Institute Library, (as Harvey’s Phycol. Britt., & Phycol. Austral., Bentham’s British Flora, Sowerby’s Grasses, Tripp’s Mosses, Cooke’s Fungi, Couch’s Fishes, Johnston’s Zoophytes, Brown’s Conchology, Morris’ Brit. Birds, Lyell’s Geology, &c., &c.) – and she was within 10 hours sail of her port (Nelson) & weather fine when she struck an outermost edge of the sand spit at Cape Farewell in Cook’s Strait, – and all went in that S. maelstroom! The Books were insured and I have re-ordered them but time flies – with me! (I am getting old and I feel it) still I live in hope. ––
But this is only a part of my Botl. loss & disappointment. A large collection of Ferns from the Polynesian Island were shipped for me in a little trading schooner to Auckland; she arrived there & discharged & remained 3 weeks, but went to sea w. that package in her, and then she foundered near Fiji! crew saved who told the tale. ––
And now again, another! All my copies of the Linn. Society’s publications from early in ’69 had been quietly accumulating in my London Agent’s warehouse according to my order, – as I had from that time thought I should certainly visit Engd. and possibly remain there – However, some 9 months back I directed them to be sent out to me, and the case has just arrived in Capital order, – but, while I have all the “Journals” L.S., – from early ’69 to Feby. 77 – complete, – I have not the “Transactions”!! Very likely, owing to my Agents (Dixon & Co) omitting to send to Burlington House for them. I have just written to them, – also to Mr Kippist the Librarian, for I note a bye-law of L.S., that all publications not taken away are forfeited after 5 years. – which, I hope, will not be carried out towards me under all the circumstances, and so I would beg of you to speak a word (if necessary) early in my favour in this matter. –
Finding that I could not do what I had wished and in part planned, re our Ferns, during the past winter – I turned my attention to some papers for our H. Bay branch of the N.Z. Institute (being stirred up also in that direction by Drs Hector & Buller, who had both been here twice during this year, – ’77,) and so got out 4 papers, – all which have been sent on to Hector, – and some will (I suppose) appear in the next vol. of the “Transactions.” I just got given the titles: –
1. On the day in which Cook took possession of N.Z. (I assert, the hitherto observed day is wrong, both as to time and place, and this, I think, I have pretty nearly proved). 
2. On the Development and Metamorphosis of one of our large Butterflies, – Danais. –––
3. On the first Artist who visited N.Z., Parkinson, who was w. Cook & Banks: I love this young (forgotten) fellow & his memory: what would I not give to see his Drawings in B.M. 
4. On the ancient N.Z. Dog. – (Here, I absolutely venture to break a lance w. Hector!)
	But it is here hard, heavy, sisyphean labour, to work on any thing intellectual in such a place as this, – where Mammon and Comus (alias Christy minstrels!! & such like,) alone hold undisputed sway. We have nearly 70 members – they will all pay their £1.1.0 per ann. (though some grumble cui bono?), but as to attend a meeting – heigho! 3, 5, 7, – or nil! and I am Hon. Secy. & Treasr. (or servant of all work sans salary!) I will just enclose a copy of our “Report,” and you will see that I have also to get out an address for our annual meeting, – which should be done by the President or V.P. (Note, the names of members are all set down plain,! very naked, no titles, &c., &c. – for, what w. Colonial J.P.’s., Captains, Colonels, Majors of Militia. C.E., &c, &c, &c, – I could not manage it, – so, slash! & cut the Gordian knot! Probably some don’t like it.
	I had also wished to write to your Mr. Baker (Kew), on one or two matters respecting our ferns, & hope yet to do so anon. Last year a Botanl. correspondent called my attention to what Mr Baker had published in “Journal of Botany,” April/75, respecting me and my N.Z. Fern – Lindsæa viridis: which (on being (at last!) pronounced to be a true species,) is allowed to bear my Ms. specific name, &c., &c. – and I then wished to give him a wee intimation, that such was truly published many years ago, – as, indeed, he might (?ought) have known, seeing it was so stated both by your honoured Father (Sp. Filicum), and by yourself,! (Flor. N.Z.) – although neither of you allowed its validity as a species. I hear, also, that Baker has made my Hymenophyllum Frankliniarum (your æruginosum) into subtillissimum; whence did he get that name? and is it of older published date than mine? I shall enclose a copy of my first old fern brochure for him. ––
	But I must not omit to thank you for copies of your two addresses (’75 & ’76) as President of R.S., – which I received here a few months ago; particularly for your kind & prized memento written thereon – “from his affectionate old friend”! You little thought, perhaps, in the multiplicity of your duties, what a potent spell those words would prove w. this “old friend” of yours! What a host of pleasing reminiscences of the long past! like a troop of spirits from the vasty deep, such would evoke! –– Just like Mungo Park’s moss, or some little plant you may have gathered at Cape Horn, Campbell’s Island, or the Himalaya: for I ever hold with Wordsworth, (though I don’t always agree w. him,) that
“To me the meanest flower that blows can give 
Thoughts that do often lie too deep for tears.” 
and then, dear Hooker, you must not forget that here I am wholly alone, i.e. as to intellectual human society. 
I have also to thank you for a copy (as usual) of your last Annual Report of Kew Gardens, lately received. How very much I should like to see them! but this, I suppose, I shall never realise. By-the-bye, you have stirred me a bit about your Cyathea princeps, which seems to to have been an old plant w. you at Kew, and yet not mentioned (under that name) by your father in Sp. Film. I hope yet to supply you w. some new Cyath. from N.Z., also a pretty Hymenophyllum (which I have named erecto-alatum)  it is a very striking species, and, as I take it, between H.H. multifidium & flexuosum, but certainly distinct, – stipes not winged, and the primary & secondary rachis winged, crisped, and vertical not plane. And I have good reasons for believing that I have one (if not two) new species of Metrosideros, but you shall know before very long. 
I notice, in a paper just to hand by mail, that you were (in August) in N. America Botanizing. – steering for the Rocky Mountains – in company w. your old Botanical friend, Dr Gray, & others. Well! now you will have done the 5 quarters (!) if not 6, – Europe, Asia, Africa, Australia, & Polynesia, S. America, & N. America! Shall hope to hear of your having returned to England, safe, & sound, & renovated. 
Last year I had 2-3 calls from an Uncle of yours, Dr Turner. I suppose he would have told you, as we talked much of you; unfortunately I was then very busy w. my school duties. 
In looking over what I have written, I see I have mentioned Presl, & Mettenius works on ferns: this requires a bit of explanation. I did not exactly order these, – but I had said to my Bookseller, “to send me any new good works on ferns, particularly on Hymenoph.,” & so he sends me these!
And now I must conclude, I hope this may find you well, & that you may find time to read it, & believe me,
			Yours ever affy.,
				Wm Colenso
 # 


24 February 1882
Napier, N. Zealand,
Feby. 24th., 1882
My dear Sir Jos. Hooker
I must not allow this Mail to leave us without writing: – I scarcely, however, know how to do so, in a brief letter, having so much to say. –
Two days ago I received your Official Report of Kew Gardens for ’80, and thank you for it (you have not forgotten me!) – the sight of it determined me to delay no longer my writing to you; though I could never tell you all. 
Some years ago, I think, I received a note from you requesting some tubers of Kumara (Ipomœa chrysorrhiza), the true genuine old sort: well; I set to work directly, and from that time to the present have repeatedly tried in all directions, and have failed! For many years they have not been grown anywhere in these parts; the only places where we suppose & hope such may still be found are in a few isolated glens about the E. Cape (interior), and inland in the mountainous district among the Urewera tribe, – and even there, only by a very few old Maoris, who live as hermits, far away from the bustling world of their own altered people! Indeed, from more than one of those far off & out-of-the-way spots, some tubers have been promised me at various times, – but I have always been unable to obtain them, and that not from want of funds or ample rewards offered. 
My main dependence was on a friend of mine, a Mr Locke, (an old and able Government Officer among the Maoris,) who has also striven largely for me & for you: but, 2 years ago he broke his leg at Wellington (a horrid compound fracture) and he is not quite well yet, though he can get about, but not again visit personally (which he intended to do) those old spots where he is so well-known. We still live in hope (a faint one, I fear,) for this next approaching season. But words would fail me to show the trouble we have had after this one article, and yet failed!
A few weeks back I saw a statement in an Auckland paper that you had written to Mr Cheeseman (the Secy. & Curator of the Auckland Institute) anent the Kumara tubers – I can only hope that he may succeed, though I doubt it. Kumara are still planted in some parts, but not (I fear) that kind; the larger imported sorts have long superseded the old original N.Z. ones. –
And yet, my dear Sir Joseph, with all my failures, and consequent non-writing to you, I have often – very often – had you in mind. Indeed, it can never be otherwise with me while life lasts; for I daily (almost) refer to and use your Botanical Books. 
You get a Vol. annually of the “Transactions N.Z. Institute” sent to you from the Director, Dr Hector, and if you have found time to look into it you will have seen how I have been engaged, (and am still); last year in Vol. xiii, there was much concerning the Kumara (natural), & not a little of it, I think, new; and in this year’s vol. (xiv.) there will be more, but from a widely different position, – which will, I think, interest you & many readers. 
If you should not have already dipped into that portion of vol. xiii (supra), I would recommend you to do so, – especially at pp. 13, 14, 34-36, where you may find something new, Botanically. Vol. xiv. will have some account of their ancient myths & quasi-religious ceremonies respecting the Kumara. –
I have also been adding a little to our N.Z. Botany, & have several specimens reserved for Kew, which I hope to send you shortly: some of them would have been forwarded long ago, had I not been always living in hope of getting the Kumara tubers to send with them. 
I am now about leaving Napier on my usual autumnal visit to the forests, where I always thoroughly enjoy myself – the trees &c. know me, & we talk to each other! There I hope to acquire some flg. & frtg. spns. of new plants, marked on my last visit thither in the Spring. –
We held the annual Meeting of our Branch Institute a fortnight ago. I send you a copy of our Report. This Society (as you may well suppose,) has given me a great deal to do – in my capacity of servant of all work! but I am still able to get through my duties, and, on the whole, enjoy pretty good health; though chronic Rheumatism “off and on”, and repeated attacks of Bronchitis, are, no doubt, doing their sapping & mining work. 
This is but an apology for my long silence and seeming neglect: all appearances are against me, I know; – but, pray, do believe me. –
I hope you are quite well & enjoying good health. I know you are steadily working as of old. And with kindest best regards, Believe me,
My Dear Sir Jos. Hooker. 
		Yours sincerely,
			W. Colenso. 
 # 


22 January 1883

Napier, N. Zealand, Jany. 22nd. 1883
My dear Hooker
	Thanks hearty real big & manifold for your very kind letter of Septr 21/82. The very sight of your hand-writing (so well-known & so stereotyped within!) do me more good than –––––––– well, an A.1. Doctor’s presciptn., or a bottle of Australian wine – my favourite beverage (always in moderation). For I have begun to fear, that I had some how offended you; and then I had more recently feared that the Chrysorhizus tubers had perished in the fire which destroyed a portion of that August mail in the Atlantic – and all this in addition to their being sent off late – too late in the season: so you may easily see I had lots to cheer me on the receipt of your letter. Only this day, when down in town, I was speaking w. a Maori Chief from the back country, and I am to get from him & his sub-tribe some kumara, – say, in March-April, – which I will also send to you. 
	To your letter: you kindly say (like yourself of old) & your dear & respected father, too,) – “I should have much liked a little personal news.” I think I did not say very much on that score in my last, because, as I have already said, I was fearing that I had somehow offended you. I am well in health, better this year past (free from Rheumatism) than for many years before, and all faculties as sound as ever, – indeed, I think my sight is improving, though I have never yet used glasses; the smallest type, and close writing, I can both read & write for long hours day & night. Living alone, and eschewing calls & visiting, I am but little intruded on, & my time (which is wholly my own) is fully occupied in one thing & another (I cannot be idle); – 1st In papers and specimens & correspondence & accounts for our young Phil. Instit., – 2nd on specimens for the Col. Museum & Dr Hector; – Mollusca for Prof. Hutton, Xt. Church N.Z. Coccidea for Maskell, ditto; Lepidopt. for Fereday, ditto; Coleoptera for Brown, Auckland, &c. – all, on my part, a labour of love, though it sometimes tries me; for while my mental faculties are as good as ever, (save, perhaps memory of recent things,) my physical strength is, of course, less & lessening – at 72 – But my choicest hours (days), are spent far away in the solitary sub-alpine forests, whither I generally resort 2-3 times in the year, far from the haunts of man. I have said “solitary” – but I am never solitary there, – all know me & welcome me (don’t laugh) – the ancient trees, shrubs, ferns, plants, mosses, Hepaticæ, &c, &c., – we know each other, and I often speak to them, – & not unfrequently your name is mentioned aloud & much oftener thought on. 
	Then, as to money matters I am easy, my wants being few. I have never sought much (had I done so, and cared to do so with the many opportunities I have had, I should, perhaps, now be the richest man in money in N.Z.) I have a little, pretty regular on the whole, enough to live decently on, & no desire to increase it, or to speculate: so, w. “Health, peace, & competence”, (having learnt the hard lesson, to bring down one’s mind to one’s situation) I toddle along pretty well. 
	Sometimes – now & then – I long for a visit from a friend, or to hear the sound of a human voice speaking kind words, – but, as I cannot command such, I take a few strides up and down (room, or outside, as the case may be,) look at Nature – Land, Sea, and Sky, and return to my Books. Often exclaiming, “My mind to me a Kingdom is.” How I should get on without my library (and I have a large one now for a private person in N.Z.), I don’t know. 
	I did well in my last 2 journeys to the woods in the spring-summer months (Novr. & Decr.), although I was sadly hindered in Novr. by a Fortnight’s continuous rain & snow! Such deep snow as I had never before seen around me in N.Z., save on the heights of the Ruahine mountain range. I gained a few new things I had long been in quest of; descriptions of some of them will (I suppose) appear in Vol. XV. of N.Z. “Transactions” – and specimens I have reserved for you, to go by some wool-ship hence, anon; the spns. of Tree Ferns &c. being too bulky to go by Mail. One little Crypt. in particular, a Monoclea (which being different in fructifn. (capsule) &c. from M. Forsteri, I have described as M. Hookeri – after Sir W.) will, I think, please you much: for 45 years I have known this plant in its barren state, but never found it in fruit till now! When I cried Eureka twice over. 2 or 3 Ferns, or more, will also please you, & especially 2 new Cordylines. 
	With his letter I shall send you a registered packet of printed matter. I have only just received from our Govt. a few copies of the specimen sheets of my Polynesian Lexicon which Ms had been nearly 8 years in their hands! (and that, too, after their having been urgently asked for by them for immediate publication!) – and only now printed through repeated & growing pressure. I have appended to the copy an old Daily Paper, which is, in part, explanatory, & will give you a little of our unfortunate back history (self & work) if you may find time to read it. Never was man more bitterly disappointed than I have been, & that repeatedly, in my Lexicon work!
	But with me, now, – Time is past. and the worst is, I don’t know who both would & could take up my work after me. Had the Govt. kept to the terms of their agreement w. me, the work would have been finished & published long ago, & they have recouped their outlay. The execution of it should never have been allowed to become a political question, – and so contingent on an ever changing Ministry. I could write a deal on this head, & fill sheets! especially to a dear old sympathizing friend like you. I am sending a specimen copy to Max Müller, to Editor of “Nature”, to Trübner & Co., &c. &c. 
	I trust you saw a note of mine to the Secretary of the “Darwin Meml. Fund” (Burlington Ho.) I did what little I could here, but (as too often before) had the Ch. against me! and in remitting my small amount I had desired the Secy. to let you see my note. This I was led to do from the fact, of yourself and Darwin having been always so very intimate, & that I had the great pleasure of spending a day with him, also, at Paihia so that you two were, like the Siamese twins, always together in strong relief on my memory. 
	I am right glad to find you so well in health & so well employed, – would that such were more profitable to you financially especially as you have a family. I trust, however, that you have no cares on this head: pardon me, when I say it, that if £100, even £200 would be of real service to you, draw on me to that amount any day while I am above board, & I will honour it. 
	I rejoice to find that Bentham is so zealously working w. you at Kew, – even now as of yore! I do honour, aye, I love that man: his Fl. Austral. (into which I have had to dip pretty often), has caused me repeatedly to thank him for many things therein; not least his reasonably staying Müeller’s wild synthetic notions. I would however, that he had also given us the smaller Crypts. If still with you, please present my highest respects & kindest of regards. I (and we here at Napier) have long striven annually to get Bentham made an Hony. Memb. of our Instit., but have hitherto failed. We, here, only carried one man (Max Müller): of course, we have but one vote among the ½ dozen. 
	I assure you that I am greatly pleased in hearing direct from you, that you also, have been interested in sending me papers in the “Trans”. vols. of the N.Z. Inst. I always supposed you might be (w. some of them, at least,) if you had time to look into them, particularly w. mine on the Kumara, – natural (vol. XIII) & artificial or semi-religious (vol. XIV), this latter especially in that old chant or invocation (pp. 43-48), – together with the almost equally ancient spell of Paikea (pp.20-25): these were among my chef d’œvres in translation of the ancient & recondite old Maori pieces! Verily this people were a great people: but Fuit Ilium!  	Did you manage to run through my paper “on the Colour sense of the Ancient Maoris,” w. its “addendum” (vol. XIV. “Trans”)? In writing that paper I had you often before my mind. I was pleased to find, in the April No. of the “Contemporary Review”, Montagu Lubbock writing on the same theme & arriving at the same conclusions. 
	I regret however to say, that you will not see any paper of mine on Old Maori matters in this forthcoming vol. of the “Trans.” I have been ill-used (thoughtlessly, it may be, but “Evil is done by want of thought, as well as want of heart,”) by our Council, who had encouraged a young surveyor named Locke to come out in the Maori line. I showed, that if we both wrote on the same Maori subjects, that all our papers could not be printed in the “Trans.”, – but L. (having married into one of our rich (parvenu) colonial families &c, &c.,) would not give way, & so I withdrew; – this was last winter. At a Council meeting last week I gave in my resign. as Hon. Secy., and, lo! it was as a shell into Arabi’s camp!! Now all manner of fine things are said, and, no doubt, as they say, – if I withdraw from Office the whole will come down like a pack (house) of cards. (Even offering to make me President). And now it is left to me to decide: it is an awkward situation to be in. I have felt this barbed iron also, and feel it still. ––
	We have lots of good Sc. works in our Library, and more at hand, and not a few of yours, and of Sir William’s among them: I even offered Wesley £10 for a copy of his Brit. Jungermannia for our Inst. Library. 
	Thanks for your val. and esteemed present, “The Botany of Kerguelen’s Land”: my friend Dr Spencer, who is hard at work on our Desmids & f. w. algæ, grabbed it at once! & has it now. 
	Would you let me know what seeds of our N.Z. plants are still desiderata at Kew: I may be able to help you to some. 
	There, on your side of the water, you could only help me to one thing, (i.e. if in your power,) viz. to become an F.R.S. I have often thought, – I have won those spurs also, – for my long hearty & free service in the battle-field of science, though following at a distance. I know I have had many against me (both Ch. & State), & sore uphill work it has often been! The old game of the Priest & the Levite passing carelessly by, has been carried out to its letter for me, and with a bit of refined modern spicing to boot! Thank goodness! I can now afford to look back and smile. I scarcely need say to you, that if that could be done, all expenses be thereby incurred would be readily met. 
	Our Bishop a short time ago ordained 2 middle-aged Maoris: those had been my “boys”: I had taught them to read & write, and, in one time, Baptized them, &c, &c. And so with the late Maori Member of the General Assembly (Karaitiana = Christian), and the present one also, – 2 chiefs of Hawkes Bay, whom I had first drawn out of savagery, taught a, b, c, &c, &c, and Baptized, &c, &c., and thus (even in these only) I have something to look back upon. Our Bp. and myself are friendly, he sometimes calls (though I never go to Church). Last winter he brought the Bp. of Tinnivelly (who was here journeying) to see me! Only fancy, two Bishops visiting in a friendly way a poor excommunicated heretic! an upholder of Darwin!! They caught me hard at work, in my old rags & slippers (easy to wear), with specimens all around! Tinnivelly seemed a nice free old man (older than me!) and devoid of starch and pride; he examined many things (Botl. & Zoologl. specimens), in which he seemed much interested, & we parted good friends. 
	And now my very dear old friend, I trust you will not be displeased with my long “personal” yarn, (like him whom the “Ancient Mariner” button-holed!) such a mingled yarn, perhaps, you may not have been bored with since you left the “Erebus”, – you evoked it!
	Believe me ever,
		Most sincerely yours,
			
W. Colenso

In closing 26th Jany. 
– Would you like to have a lot of Crypts. (mostly Hepaticæ) in the rough & presumably several new? or, should I send to Mitten? Required, in return, name of each. – Let me know early. 

I have been solicited from various quarters – for “exchanges,” but I don’t care for exchanges. 

I enclose spns of Plagiochila subsimilis, mihi. I have larger ones for you to see. W.C. 

 # 






11 May 1883 

Napier, N.Z. May 11/83
My dear Hooker
Your kind letter of March 9th to hand: thanks. Two days back Enys (from X.Ch. Canterbury) en route for England called, & kindly offered to take any parcel for you. 
Would that I had timely known of it! However I put up these few seeds (choice sorts) which I have at hand: some recently gathered: their duplicates I will send by S.F. Mail leaving here next week, which may first be w. you. I am desperately busy: only last week returned from sub-alpine forest (a month absent) and now have to get a paper ready for night of 14th, to open our annual Institute, – or no meeting!
Will write next week, –
Ever yours sincerely
Wm. Colenso

18 May 1883
Napier, N. Zealand,
May 18/83
My dear Hooker
Thanks for your kind letter of March 9th, which arrived by last S.F. Mail to us. I cannot tell you how gratified I felt, in seeing your hand writing again, and in reading your kind and valued words. Nevertheless, I cannot (will not) attempt to reply fully by this outgoing S.F. Mail leaving us in the morning, – but hope & purpose to do so by the next one. Indeed you will receive another note from me (of last week) by this Mail steamer. A Mr Enys of Xt.Ch. N.Z., en route for England (I think you know him,) kindly called here last week, most unexpectedly! and to his care I committed a small parcel of seeds for you, (some you had wished to have – in your letter just then to hand – and others, I know desiderata,). I divided what I happened to have by me for you, intending to send those still here by this very mail, supposing that Enys was going by the Red Sea route. But afterwards, on his again calling, I found that he was going by way of S.F.!! so I retain these for our next mail: and I hope to send you some more Kumara & other things w. them.
Enys will tell you how dreadfully busy he found & left me! and (I hope) that he saw some specimens (new ferns, &c.) in the rough, in my back-room, bearing your name. I would rather than a £10 note, that I had known a little earlier of your wants for Kew (as per your last letter): for I had been up in the forests 5 weeks (from end of March to 2nd May) and there saw often an epiphytal Orchid &c. &c. It was a sad time of rain while there, indeed I never knew such an April in N.Z.! And on the whole I did but little, save, I believe, a few new Hepaticæ, – of which more anon. –
Now, however, that the weather seems settled, fine, I am thinking of returning thither to secure a few things for you. I hope it wont be with me as w. Bacon, – or, poor dear Sinclair! although I have often thought, in my solitary wanderings in our dense unvisited forests, that I may become lost some day. 
But I must stop this. –
Dactylanthus has recently been found in the interior, between this & Taupo, several spns. but not first rate ones: we have received some in spirits –
I will endeavour fully to reply to your letter – re seeds, plants, &c., &c., – in my next. I have been completely bothered of late, – partly through my long absence, but mainly through my having again had to do all (or no meeting!) for and at our first opening Institute meeting on Monday last. I find this work bearing heavily upon me. I shall enclose a clipping from our local of that meeting, – which is pretty correct. 
Now, as to “Fellows of Royal Society residing in our Colony signing a Certificate in my favour,” – I only know of two – Hector, or Buller, – and I have no reason to suppose, that they would, or could, refuse to do so: but, what kind of certificate is wanted? I must write to them about it. –
Hearty thanks my dear old friend for all your kindness in this, and in all matters. I am keeping pretty well: of course, some Rheumatism every day, which I often check w. a simple anodyne pill (of my own) at night; but as long as it does not assume the Lumbago phase, I can – or can endeavour to – bear it. 
Ever my dear Hooker,
		Most sincerely yours,
			Wm Colenso. 
 # 


22 May 1883
Napier, N. Zealand,
	May 22nd 1883. 
My dear Hooker,
Here I am again writing to you (3 times within 10 days!). This note is to go per “British Queen”, leaving N.Z. on 31st inst., – and is merely written to apprise you of a small case of Kumara tubers that I have this day carefully packed for Kew, & am sending it to Lyttleton to the “British Queen”. 
I have just finished a note to the Captain of the boat, asking him to pass the word on board to have the case kept dry & in a moderate, warm temperature. I have done my best, & hope the tubers may safely reach you in good condition – these are a fine and picked lot. 
There are 3 old kinds, or vars. – in this case, viz. –
Kiokiorangi,
Pehu,
Toroamahoe, –
and I yet hope to obtain other vars., – if I do I will send them. 
I have also enclosed a few newly ripe berries of Cordyline Sturmii, (see Trans. N.Z. Inst., vol. xv.) – I have dried them a little and I hope they may arrive in a living state, – but I have retained a lot to go by next month’s boat with other seeds. –
Its fruit is fine, 4 l. diamr., & wholly blue, – very nearly the blue of Vinca, a little lighter; ea. berry containing a lot of seeds. I had not seen its recent fruit before. 
In cooking your kumara don’t boil them, better steam them with their jackets on: baked under meat (Yorkshire pudding fashion) they are delicious. Please tell Lady Hooker this, – and be sure to take my part for daring to intrude in Cooking. –
My last letter to you was by ’Frisco Mail on 18th. inst. –
Yesterday I wrote to both Dr Hector and Dr Buller, Fellows R.S. re Certificate. 
I purpose returning tomorrow to “70-mile Bush,” to get you a few orchids, seeds, &c. 
Bel. me,
		Ever yours faithfully
			Wm. Colenso. 

15 June 1883 
Napier, New Zealand,
June 15, 1883
My dear Hooker
	I trust you may have safely received my last note of 22nd May together with the box of Kumara tubers then sent, before this can reach you: I sent them per “British Queen” (new steamer) which left Lyttleton 31st May. In that note I said, I intended going off to the forests an Orchid-hunting for you on the next day (23rd) – well, I did so; hoping to have fine weather and so return in a few days: not so, however. I got there (80m. S.) in heavy rain, which, with very high winds intervening (rendering it wholly unsafe to approach those forests) lasted throughout May! –
	Although I was not prepared for this, I had determined not to return empty-handed, so I waited. With June the weather wholly changed: the days now were gloriously fine (worth waiting for), with hard frost, thereon. 30° & snowing, at times, in showers on the mountain tops (Ruahine). Of course, the woods were wet, and cold and dark too in the glens being nearly mid-winter. However, I succeeded in getting a lot of our epiphytal orchids for you, also some seeds and Hepaticæ, and a few other Crypts. – Fungi, for your good friend Mr Berkeley, – which I hope may prove both interesting and novelties. – I returned on the 8th into Napier, none the worse for my winter stay in those woods, save loss of time. 
	Arriving here I found a heap of letters, &c., awaiting me, and among the foreign ones your greatly valued one of March 11th, containing also 3 photos of yourself, of Darwin, and of Swainson. What a treat! So unexpected too! How I have been gazing at them! looking into them, – as it were questioning them – endeavouring to deduce something: – but no! save from the depths of my own busy memory. 
	Yet Darwin’s does remind me of the fine tall man with whom I pleasantly strolled Paihia beach on Xmas. Day (afternoon) in 1835. But I cannot fancy yours at all: you have altered greatly since ’41 – in everything but your specs! but you were a very young man then. I scarcely need add, that I shall prize them. You ask for mine: at present I can only send you a small and old one taken (like your own) nearly 20 years ago, – i.e. at Wellington, in ’65, when there at the Genl. Assembly as M.P. for this place, – but I have a larger one for you, taken 2 years back here (negative since burnt in a fire), & this I shall send you soon. 
	With a very great amount of interest I have read your account of your family, finances, doings, prospects, &c., &c., – and with you I rejoice: for you, my dear Hooker, have much to rejoice over, in your family & affairs. Your plain friendly and kind narration has pleased me much: – and not least, to hear of “Joey”, your youngest, being likely to become a worthy follower of his father & grandfather in Botanical investigations and knowledge. 
	But to business: –
All this day I have been working for you and have put up & sent off to Post Office 2 small boxes to go (w. this) by Mail via S.F. tomorrow, – may they reach you safely, on or about July 30th. 
	In the larger box are some living epiphytal Orchids done up in moss, &c. 
No. 1. Dendrobium Lessonii (mihi)
No. 2. Earina autumnalis: 
No. 3 Earina quadrilobata (mihi)
(for 1, and 3, believed to be sp. nov., see “Trans. N.Z. Inst.,” vol. xv (1883), pp. 325, 326:) all these are hardy: some grow flourishingly in the ground in rocky soil, w. vegetable mould between. –
	I may here remark that I have never seen Dendrobium Cunninghamii, vera (the N. plant), growing here in these parts. – In the other box are a few Kumara tubers, that were left from those sent last month per “British Queen”; but the remaining ones got mixed. –
	I purpose sending you 2 other boxes or small cases, next week: these two will go by “Ionic” steamer, lately arrived at Lyttleton from England, – said to leave N.Z. on 30th inst. In one will be the living duplicates of those Orchids; and in the other several specimens of dried plants, – new, including Monoclea, – which have long been accumulating and set aside for you: also, some seeds, &c., &c., – of all which more anon. –
	I enclose the receipt for the Box sent last month per “British Queen”: – it vexed me pretty much, when, on my return I saw it! for it was received here on the 3rd inst., – and that ship had left N.Z on the 31st  and there was no means of forwarding the receipt to you till now: I hope, however, you will have gained the said case sans receipt. 
	I also send you a copy of my Botanical papers, &c., &c., in vol. “Trans.”, (“Author’s copies”) – which please do me the honour of accepting. I cannot at present say anything about those (& other) plants: will endeavour to do so in my next. 
	Owing to my late prolonged absence in the woods, I have much to do just now. The big case of 110 vols. (“Trans.” xv.) is also just to hand for Members, and I have all the job of packing, &c, &c, and sending out. I suppose you will have received your copy from Wellington by the last mail thence?
	I feel a little (or, rather, more than a little) annoyed at the “rejection” (or omission) of 3 of my papers from this volume: [You will find them mentioned at p.542:] they were very popular here with our Members, but I cannot say anything more about them now. In “Nomenclature” I may have trod on some persons’ toes! Some enquiry however will have to be made. 
	In my last note to you (I wrote 3 to you in May!) I mentioned, that I had written to Dr. Hector and to Dr Buller as F.R.S. re a Certificate: strange to say (though I had requested an early reply), I have not heard from them! I cannot account for it. Possibly my 2 papers on “Nomenclature” may have something to do w. their silence: but I will soon know or try to know. 
	I should not omit to tell you that I have received an excellent letter from Max Müller, re my Lexicon sheet, I having sent him a copy. He wrote from Germany, whither he had gone on the death of his mother, and to which place my letter had been sent. 
	And now my dear old friend, I must close, & say Good-bye, I am tired. And with kindest affectionate regards, and very best wishes,
	Believe me,
		ever & always
			Your attached,
				Wm Colenso. 
30 June 1883

Napier, N. Zealand, June 30/83
My dear Hooker,
	Yesterday evening – through dint of hard labour and sticking to it – I sent off to the Port (2 miles away) the 2 cases of specimens promised in my last (of the 15th inst.) to be taken thence to Lyttleton tomorrow, and to go thence to England, per str. “Ionic”, and I hope they may reach you safely with the Orchids living. I wrote a note to the Commander, (who, I find is an R.N. Officer,) begging him to pass a word on board as to the proper kind of stowage needed for each, which I also pointed out. You will find a heterogenous lot, and I trust not a few novelties among them. 
	In the case of living Orchids, No. II., there are just the Duplicates of the last (small) box per S.Fr. Mail, but in larger masses: (viz. Earina autumnalis, E. quadrilobata, & Dendrobium Lessonii,) – and, also, 2 fine specimens of (undisturbed clumps) of Sarcochilus, – I believe S. breviscapa, mihi. (See, for description of this plant, Trans. N.Z.I. vol xiv. p.332.) – these I subsequently sought & fortunately obtained. And growing matted on the larger lots of roots, &c., you will find Hepaticæ, Lichens, &c, galore!
	In case No. I., (1) dried plants, – are specimens of those I have from time to time described in Trans. N.Z. Institute, – of nearly all of them, (of some 2 or 3 I am run out until I get more, I did not however know of this before I proceeded to make up for you). I shall enclose a Memo., that you may know easily where to find them in those Vols. ––
	(2) a large lot of Hepaticæ, – in 2 boxes. 
	(3) a small lot of curious & peculiar Fungi, most of them being new to me. I hope to hear that these may please Mr. Berkeley. I shall enclose a memo. of them. 
	(4) a duplicate lot of seeds lately sent you, with the addition of Drimys, Pratia, & Colensoa, – a few of each. Colensoa, at present, is only in one hand here! (Sturm, our Gardener & Horticulturist). I have long sought a plant of it from the N., but hitherto fruitlessly. I have now, however, one plant (also from Sturm) in a pot, which, though 4 ft. high! has not yet flowered; if it does, & perfects seen, you shall have some more seeds from me. 
	(5) A large photo. of myself taken here 2 years ago, and said to be “an excellent likeness”. 
	I regret very much so many of the Hepaticæ spns. now sent being barren, – it is always so here in these woods: I suppose it is owing to their fruiting in the winter or early spring, (as you found them at the Bay of Islands,) and so, when I visit and revisit them throughout the summer I am disappointed, – but I purpose going early this season (say Septr.) to have a peep at them – and partly so for your sake: and if in luck, then you shall have, the lion’s share. Further, I have little doubt of not a few of these specimens being repeated, – aye, over & over! (collected, as they were, at different times) however, better so, than to have omitted any. 
	I may also tell you, that most of them were collected by me for Mr Ralfs (who had asked me for some), and a portion of their duplicates (about 1/3rd). I shall send to him by next Mail. I had also sent some, last year to W. Curnow, of Penzance, (a fellow-townsman, though I do not know him,) who had also begged them. So, if Mitten is going to look over these now sent, let him make all speed about it, as to any thing new; and be sure to let me know something of them all – as to names &c., …. agreeing w. their respective numbers; and should more of any particular sort or number be desired, let me know early and fully, as I have kept by me the little minor localities, and therefore may be able to supply more, and perhaps better spns. – Having mentioned the names of W. Curnow & Mitten, I should add, – that, in my sending a lot of Hepaticæ to Curnow, I particularly charged him, if he found anything new among them to remember Mitten – for whose abilities in this line I have great admiration. 
	Shortly after my last letter to you I received a very excellent letter from Buller, – who had been absent, he says, from the Waikato, to which place I had addressed my letters. I will quote a portion. “as to the R.Sy. – Sir J.H. wrote, asking me to sign my n. to your nom. paper, in same col. with himself. I need hardly tell you that I have had much pleasure in doing so. Hector & Haast have signed in the same col. As the paper had to be returned from XtCh., it did not reach me in time for last mail, but it goes home by the present one – all in good time, as the Election does not take place before March.” – To this I now hope that that matter will be, so far, all right. I have not however heard from Hector, and fear I shall not. I shall call a meeting of the Council of our Socy. next Tuesday (3rd prox.) to consider the state of things, which, I know, will cause me to write officially to Dr Hector about my “rejected” Papers. – (a job I dislike). 
 	And this reminds me to ask you (if correct to do so) – to get the Secy. Linn. Socy. to tell me how to act, in the way of my writing any paper for the L.S. Are such sent to the Secy. ? Does he arrange for the reading, &c? And, are any received there for “Journal”, &c., that have been already published out here – say, in “Trans. N.Z. Inst.”? &c. 
	The grand old Ruahine range is now covered w. its winter’s mantle of snow. It is our barrier on the S.W., and is most conspicuous from my parlour end-window. (It sometimes serves to remind me of that great barrier of eternal ice you saw “down S.”, – so well sketched by Davis & others in Ross’ and your joint interesting and prized vols.) How often do I gaze on Ruahine, winter & summer! and long every year again to tread its heights!! for I am sure of many Botanical treasures being there, and not a few novelties. I am a greater believer than ever in the exceedingly localized areas of much of our N.Z. Botany. Old as I am, if the Maoris were now as they once were (willing & faithful & workish, & plain & simple) I would venture thither. Could I but once get on the summits I should be able to manage well enough, but I cannot possibly ford and reford those cold & rapid mountain streams of snow-waters, & climb those dreadfully tangled and steep pathless acclivities. In one journey of 3 successive days, 237 wadings! which gave me 2-3 months of painful sciatica. How strange that no European besides myself has ever crossed the range! Some young and strong fellows have often “talked” of doing so, & have sought directions from me, – but they are all riders, (which I was not, – I had no horse to ride! & even if I had it would have been useless there) and so they will never accomplish it. 
	I (or we, here,) have often regretted that Dr Hector, – or, rather, the Editorial Board of Governors N.Z. Inst., – did not consent to the publication in the “Trans.” of my 2 papers re my journeys thither, & what I had collected & seen. That was my first unfortunate difference w. Dr. Hector. Those papers were written in 1878. If you had such a serial in hand now as your Father’s “Lond. Journ. Bot.,” they might suit its pages, – though, perhaps, too old. 
	Mentioning that, leads me to observe that the “rejection” of those 3 papers of mine above referred to (see p.542, vol. xv. “Trans. N.Z. Inst.”, for mention of them) has rather surprised me, but I know that I had touched rather closely on the sad perversion, twisting, &c., &c., of many of our Maori names of places, plants, Chiefs, &c., so that most erroneous deductions were being drawn there from, as to meaning, &c: – e.g. in Dr Hector’s own Maps and Geography of N.Z., used here in Schools, and in the names of plants as given in the “Handbook”: – Dr Purchase’s strange error. (see Trans. N.Z. I., vol. xiii., p.440) – Taylor’s many grievous ones, – especially his “Flower of Hades”!! (Dactylanthus), &c., &c., – also of the sad innovations in naming newly-discovered species here, in the throwing aside the Cap. (initial) letter of specific name when named after a person, place, &c., – and in making all terminations to end in ii, – calling their attention to yours, and to Bentham’s Fl. Aus. Of course, if those 3 papers are “rejected” (vid. rules N.Z. Inst. Trans. p.xii, reg. 5/c.) then I write no more such for our Instit. ––
	I think I shall be able to obtain some more of those seeds mentioned by you. Some, however, as Ixerba, Libocedrus, Phyllocladus, the rarer Veronicas, and most of the Ericeæ are not in these parts, –  save on the crested mountain heights (supra), but I will do my best. Of Ericeæ we have only Gaultheria ?antipoda, – (but a thick diffuse bush of some 6 ft. high) 100 miles S.: Cyathodes, ?acerosa (growing w. preceding), also a tall shrub, 6-7 ft. high, w. light-grey (never “black”) bark; I have sometimes supposed this to be a distinct sp., and its small flowers are of a light ochrous colour: Leucopogon fasciculatus, & L. Frazeri. 
	I find I have omitted a few seeds from the lot in the case (in my hurry!) these I must send hence per first S.Fr. mail, (leaving N.Z. a few days after the “Ionic”, but may be first w. you). 
	You will see, that the berries of Rhipogonum sometimes contain 3 seeds, (and these sent were all gathered from one panicle,) – and that the seeds of Cordyline Sturmii are both numerous and angular (in your “Hand-Book”, p.280, Synopsis of the Order, you say, of Cordyline, – “Seeds globose or oblong.”
	I have a few plants (sps. nov.), which I obtained last summer, worked up and described in a paper, which, I suppose may pass muster and so be pubd. in vol. xvi Trans: among them are, – a Metrosideros, (an erect pretty white flowered shrub) a Hydrocotyle, or two, & perhaps a Panax, 2 Coprosmæ, 2 Compositæ, and probably an Olea, a Thelymitra (a handsome sp. w. peculiar column and staminodia,), a Dianella, and some Cyperaceæ & Crypts., of all which, w. spns, more anon. I shall send you, however, w. the omitted seeds (supra), fruits of my 2 new Coprosmæ, & of the supposed new Olea, for sowing. These were recently obtained by me in the woods. The 2 Coprosmæ are worthy of being raised at Kew; one (C. maculata, mihi,) a tall shrub or small tree, differing from the other sps. of the genus, bears large edible orange-coloured fruit; the other, a dear little 2-3 ft. shrub (which I shall probably name C. concinna,) bearing small claret-coloured fruit in profusion, sometimes in masses. I have long known these plants, but I sadly wanted good flg. spns., and as they flower early I have hitherto not secured them, but I purpose going very early this coming spring; besides, I can now go by Rail & by Coach to within a mile or two of their known & marked hab.: and so w. the Olea, which from its leaves & Fruit, I am pretty sure is a different sp., – the fruit is oblong, equally thick at each end (resembling in shape the larger berries of our Fuchsia excorticata,) the leaves are shorter & sub-falcate: to get flg. spns. of this tree, I shall have to procure a long ladder and carry it some 2 miles, but get there I will.
	How you would have laughed (if you had but seen me, on two occasions, in the woods, vainly endeavouring to obtain specimens by throwing up sticks and stones (sought at a distance), and losing strength, time and patience! but not coming away like the Fox in the fable, decrying the wished for fruits and crying, Bah!
	I could also have sent you a lot of Mosses, but I fear that many, or most of them would be only a repetition of what I had formerly sent to Kew (and more barren); the superior moss-producing regions being far away from Napier & littoral Hawke’s Bay. Let me know if you would welcome them as they are. 
	I enclosed in my last, the local Agents’ receipt for case of Kumara tubers shipped per “Brit. Queen”, – remarking how vexed I was to find it sent hither after she had sailed: in calling, however, on him, to pay freight, &c., I found that the origl. receipt has been duly posted to you, & that this to me was merely the Duplicate!
	Now I must close. I hope my long Yarn (or series of yarns!) will not have wearied you. One thing more, I would say that you have not got them to answer in extenso, – your time is far too valuable for that. Just a few lines at your convenience on 2-3 prominent points; – but from Mitten & Berkeley, all about “Fungi” & Hepaticæ sent. –
	And heartily wishing you health, a long life & all success, –
	Believe me, w. kindest regards,
		Yours entirely,
			W. Colenso. 

P.S. July 6th. I have not yet posted my letter begun on 30th. ulto, as date of sailing of “Ionic” had been altered: so I add this. –
Two days back I was agreeably surprised with a kit of Kumara tubers, (var. sorts, 4, all done up in little kits and named,) – from my old friendly Chief a long way off in the interior; not having heard from him (though I had written him a note to hurry) I had given them up: these shall also go to you by next ship. –
	Since closing, – a letter to hand from Professor Hutton, Xt.Ch., N.Z., (this year President of the Philosophical Institute there,) asking me, & our Council, to join them in endeavouring to get a 2nd Edn. of your “Handbook Fl. N.Z.” the “Phanerogamia only” – brought out by our Government. I bring this before our Council on Monday next, 9th and as I shall support it (with additions) I suppose it will be agreed to: – I shall seek to get the Filices added (as in the 1st part of your “HandBook”), and Buchanan’s additions & omissions re grasses corrected, – and the supervising or editing of the work not to fall into the hands of G.M. Thomson of Dunedin. –
	The S.F. May mail has just arrived here (a week late), a letter from Ralfs who seems delighted on receipt of a small lot of Hepaticæ & mosses I had sent him in a letter. 
	Once again Goodbye: –
		Yours &c. 
			W. Colenso.
When you see so many Cigar boxes, – don’t run away w. the notion that I am become a smoker. 

Memorandum of a small lot of Fungi collected by 
W. Colenso, in the forests of Hawke’s Bay, 
N. Zealand (N. Island), and sent to Sir J.D. Hooker, 
in June, 1883: per str.”Ionic”
¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬¬____________________________

b. 1. a peculiar fungus, at first effuse of pink, or pink-red, byssaid growth adhering to dead leaves (matrix), afterwards erect long flexuose wiry and black, with large moniliform peritheciæ: originally discovered by me in ’50, on the w. flanks of Ruahine mountain range, emerging from dead leaves of Coriaria, but barren & shorter; sent by me to Kew, with other spns. (see rough draft attached). 
b. 2. Curious small stipitate white clavate fungus (Clavaria-like); – on wet shady sides of a clay cutting. 
b. 3 Curious orange-coloured smooth vermicular fungus; found under large sticta on bark, rotten log. 
b. 4. Peculiar blackish fungoid substance on & among mosses, generally running in broad streaks for some inches; more plainly shown after rains, when Mosses are wet. 
b. 5. Small stipitate Fungi with globular heads of perithecia having a grayish semi-metallic appearance when wet and before bursting: on a rotten log. 
b. 6. Prostrate effuse fungus, on bark in large patches, wet dark woods. 
b. 7. Ditto	Ditto: on rotten logs. 
b. 8. Semi-stipitate imbricated fungus on rotting logs. –
b. 9. a curious red woolly convex fungus adnate on Lichen (Thelotrema), on the bark of a living tree (Dacrydium cupressinum) just felled. 
b. 10. Small stip. fungus on dead leaf of Knightia excelsa: my only spn. 
b. 11. Semi-stipitate horizontal fungus, resembling a scallop-shell (pectin), – thin, plaited, coloured, zoned; a very pretty species; my only spn. – from the trunk of a tree. 
b. 12. Small semi-stipitate horizontal fungus from mossy bark of old trees, wet woods. 
b. 13. Small semi-stipitate horizontal fungus, growing w. preceding, 2 vars. (?) α, β. 
b. 14. Peculiar small fungus, rotten logs. 
b. 15. Pretty bit of white foliated fungus, gelatinous when fresh, from old logs. – my only spn; but more were seen. 
b. 16. A similar fungus, stip. dark orange springing in lines from cracks in the wood of wet rotten logs (without bark): adhered to paper in drying. 
b. 17. Small orange-coloured stip. Fungus emerging from cracks in dead logs; adheres to paper in drying: (These 3 last are Guepinia-like). 
b. 18. Small tawny-orange semi-stipitate Fungus, growing among Mosses on dead logs. 
b. 19. A minute red fungus (?) on roots in forest; scarce. 
b. 20. Ditto ditto, on dead and dry Fagus trees. 
b. 21. A minute black-stip. ?Fungus from a rotten stump: (an Calicium?). 
b. 22. A peculiar fungus (or Lichen) growing on living Weinmannia, effuse & in large patches. 
b. 23. An elegant & graceful zoned grey and black thin fungus; grows largely & closely imbricate & pendulous on an old dead Fagus tree; Polyporus-like in form & manner of growth. A very pretty sight, & in a great number, but only noticed on that one tree. 
b. 24. A large spreading Lichen, on bark of a dead tree, (Graphideæ tribe.). Only one patch seen. 
b. 25. A bit of a peculiar Gingerbread-looking fungus, growing to a large size and very thick (stratum super stratum) on trees; very tough and hard to cut or break; only brought away a small piece by way of spn. 
b. 26. Black fungus (?Antennaria) from bark of living trees, – in fruit; from 2 localities: 1 α: 2 β. 
b. 27. Minute stipitate fungus on fruit of Ribes: – gathered in a country garden, on my way to the Woods. 
b. 28. Solyposus australis. 
    (sketch of branch)
b. 1. Fungus: rough general appearance … effuse byssoid tracings on matrix, in its fresh state. 

Memo (List) of Specimens of Dried plants 
recently described, sent to Sir J. D. Hooker, 
Kew, London: June, 1883, – W. Colenso

Name	Where published, &c. 
Dicotyledons
Clematis Parkinsoniana
Trans. N.Z. Inst., Vol. XII., p.359; Vol. XIV. 330. 
C. quadribracteolata	Trans. N.Z. I., Vol. XIV., p.329. 
Carmichælia corrugata
Tr. N.Z. I., Vol. XV., p.320. 
Gunnera strigosa
Id.              p.322. 
Metrosideros pendens
Id.      Vol. XV., p.360. 
M. subsimilis	Id.  do.      p.361. 
Loranthus punctatus
Id.  Vol. XV., p.323. 
Olearia colorata
Id.  Vol. XII., p.362. 
O. marginata	Id.  Vol. XV., p.321. 
Parsonsia macrocarpa
Id.  Vol. XIV., p.331. 
Veronica trisepala
Id.  Vol. XV., p.324. 
Monocotyledons
Earina quadrilobata
Id.  Vol. XV., p.325. 
Dendrobium Lessonii
Id.  do.      p.326. 
Pterostylis emarginata
Id.  do.      p.328. 
Libertia orbiculatus 
Id.  do.      p.329. 
Cordyline diffusa  
(C. Banksii Hk.fil.)	Id.  do.      p.330. 
C. Sturmii  
(very near C. oblicta of Norfolk island)	Id.  do.      p.331. 
Astelia spicata 
Id.  Vol. XIV., p.335. 
A. fragrans 	Id.  Vol. XV., p.333. 
Uncinia horizontalis 
Id.  Vol. XV, p.334. 
U. alopecuroides 	Id.  do.  p.335
Carex spirinostris 
Id.  do.  p.335. 
Cryptogamia
Cyathea polyneuron (C. medullaris)
Id.  Vol. XI., p.429. 
C. tricolor  (C. dealbata)	Id.  Vol. XV., p.304. 
Dicksonia gracilis  (D. squarrosa)
Id.  do.  p.306. 
Hymenophyllum pusillum  
(H. Tunbridgense)	Id.  Vol. XII., p.365. 
H. megalocarpum  (C. demissum)	Id.  Vol. XV., p.308. 
Asplenium anomolum  (A. obtusatum)
Id.  do. XV., p.309. 
Polypodium (Grammatis) paradoxum (P. australe)	Id. do. XV., p.319
P. pennigerum var. Hamiltonii 	Id.  do.  p.319. 
Gymnogramme ?leptophylla (G. nov. -Zel., Col.) 	Id.  Vol. XIII., p.373. 
Plagiochila subsimilis 
Id.  Vol. XIV., p.340. 
Gymnanthe (Marsupidium) hirsutum 
Id.  Vol. XIV., p.340. 
Symphogyna rugulosa 
Id.  Vol. XIII., p.368. 
S. biflora 	Id.  Vol. XV., p.336. 
Monoclea Hookeri 
Id.  Vol. XV., p.338. 
Trichomanes venustula  (T. venosum)
Id.  Vol. XII., p.366. 
Doodia squarrosa  
(D. caudata)	Id.  Vol. XIII., p.382. 

				W. Colenso,	
N.Z., June 30/83. 
13 July 1883 list
(July 13/83)
Memo

Herein are the seeds &c, mentioned in my letter per “Ionic”, which only left us 3 days ago. – also: – (Crypts., additional:)
b. 28. ?Polyporus – w. brown granular-like hymenicum, each granule pierced w. small circular pores: – some sps. are much larger. 
b. 29. A peculiar sea-weed from Barrier Island in the Thames, a form new to me; grows to a larger size, a branchlet sent. 
b. 30. A small fungus on Hawkweed – here in my field. 
					W.C. 
Kumara – tubers, per next ship. 
 # 


7 September 1883
Napier, N. Zealand,
	Sept 7th. 1883. 
My dear Hooker
	I was much pleased last week in noticing a telegram in our papers re the safe arrival of the “Ionic” at London – and trust you received your 2 cases of sundries by her, all right! But I was wonderfully vexed, shortly after she had sailed from Lyttleton, in receiving a note from the Shipping Agent’s Office, informing me, that by a mistake of theirs you were charged with their freight, &c.! I went down to the Port (here), & kicked up a row, but it was of no use. I cannot tell you how vexed I was: however, I have obtained a P.O.O., which I enclose, payable to you at Kew, to cover expenses. (though, if your Govt. (more liberal than ours) will stay the same, then, please, let your brave young son & name have the small benefit, as a kind of Prince-of-Wales-Birth-day “tip” from the Antipodes. 
	I have been working hard to get you some seeds of Desmoschœnus – also, of Cordyline australis (more easily obtained), and now send you some of each by this mail: – also, a few of Coprosma Baüeriana I happened to have by me. 
	I have also put up a few more Kumara (recd Jany. 21/84) – tubers (some other sorts) to go by “Doric”, leaving our waters on 26th inst. These should have been sent before, only I waited, in hopes of adding thereto, – but, again, was disappointed, – through my old acquaintance W. Locke! They are, however, hard to get. My last little lot of seeds &c., to you was in July per S.F. Mail: that mail I find has also safely arrived in England. 
	By-the-way, my youngest son (residing at Penzance) tells me of a curious botanical circumstance; and as it is re-asserted by him in his last (for I had doubted it), I will just give it to you; he says: –
	– “with reference to the Ngaio seeds” (Myoporum lætum}, “I told you, that out of one seed or nut there were 3 shoots or stems, and from another 2 stems. I had put into the ground 6 seeds, well, instead of 6 Ngaio trees I have 9 growing.” – I may add that he is both attentive & observant in all such matters. –
	Our winter is just over, and I am off to the woods next week. I greatly desire to get spns. of an early flowering terrestrial Orchid, that has always hitherto baffled me, – for while it studs the mossy carpet in the Fagus wood, with its curious single leaf, it rarely produces a flower: I have 2-3 dead & withered ones. I want, also, spns. of some of our early Phænogams, and I hope to write to you more anon, about them & other things. 
	On Monday next, 10th inst., I have to give an address before our Institute: – subject, “Tragical ends of several of our early scientific men in these S. Seas: – embracing, the 2 Cunns., Dr Sinclair, the French, and a certain young, daring & adverturous follower of Nature, who nearly came to grief in an icy bath off Franklin Island: (d’ye Ken?) 
	Hoping you are quite well, & c. kindest regards. 
		Bel. me my dear Hooker. 
			W. Colenso. 
 # 


29 October 1883
Napier, N. Zealand,
	Octr. 29, 1883. 
My dear Hooker,
	I think I must have told you in a former letter of my intention to publish here (in part by subscription) my 3 “rejected” Papers: I have done so: and I lose no time in sending you a copy, which I hope you may find time to read: – for you, & your late honoured Father, and other great & standard names on the Botanical Roll are brought forward therein. 
	I have also put up in same packet 2 copies for Linn. Soc. – trespassing on your kindness to forward them. 
	My last to you was on Septr. 7th – since then I dispatched another small case of Kumara tubers to you, per S.S. “Doric”, which left Lyttleton a few weeks back. –
	I went away to the forests in September, but was too early for those sub-alpine woods. I gained, however, a few things I had been in quest of : viz. flg. spns. (m. & f.) of Coprosma concinna (sp. nov.) – I sent you the fruit of this: the flowers are remarkably small, Especially the fem. ones: – the little Orchid I had mentioned, a Corysanthes (sp. nov.) – the smallest N.Z. sp. of the Genus: most curious in its manner of growth, (through which it had very nearly again deceived me!) as it always flowers Beneath the bed of Mosses and debris of fallen Fagus leaves, on which its one leaf reclines. I have also some new Symphyogenæ & other Hepaticæ, &c., &c. – and spns, of all for Kew, – anon. 
	When you write let me know if you would like some living Dactylanthus: I believe I can manage to get you some. 
	I am off again to those woods on 31st., after some other early plants, but I cannot stay long there this time, as I have to get ready for our next Institute meeting in Novr., – and the last for this year (bon!). At our last monthly meeting, in Octr., I set aside my own and read (from “Nature”, serial,) Huxley’s Reid Lecture at Cambridge, – a capital one. It tried me, though, the small print, gas-light, &c. ––
	I enclose a cutting from our Local. I think I sent you a local paper by the last Mail containing a resumé of our former (September) Meeting, – in which you were feelingly brought forward by me: Eh! it made me to think of “days of old”! –
	Hoping you are quite well, and all your House, and with very kindest regards, –––
	Believe me, my dear Hooker,
		Yours sincerely,
			Wm Colenso. 
 # 


27 February 1884
Napier, New Zealand,
	Feby. 27. 1884. 
My dear Hooker,
	I must write to you by this Mail – but how to compress into fair proportions what I wish to say I know not. My last to you was just 4 months back (Oct. 29), since then I have received no less than 4 letters from you, viz –
1.	Sept. 10/83: long & loving. & prized. 
2.	Octr. 37/83: covering Prof. Oliver’s memo of plants, & Mr Baker’s ditto of Ferns. –
3.	Decr 4/83: covering list of Fungi. 
4.	Decr 15/83: re 3 Lity. Papers, &c. 
1. To the first, I deeply regretted the total loss of those Epiphytal Orchids, after all my labour! it half-upset me. I trust Mitten may find something new – or of service – among the Hepaticæ, and I have plenty more to send w. Mosses. 
	Re 2nd: I was a little surprised, as you may well suppose, in reading what Prof. Oliver & Mr. Baker had written of the Plants I sent you! I must still think, in many respects they are wrong, particularly Mr. Baker; as I have had here by me all those other & allied species in their living state (which they suppose mine to be), and have most diligently compared them, over & over; I would that both those Gentlemen had read my descriptions of those plants, (“Trans, N.Z. Instit.,”) because in many instances I have pointed out the differences. Of course those differential chars. may not amount to specific ones, that perhaps, is still matter of opinion. One thing however, is certain, that should these plants be really the same as those, then your own descriptions will have to be much altered. Prof. Oliver apparently doubts Dendrobium Cunninghamii having always 5 ridges on the lip, as described by you. I stumbled by chance last week on what Thomson had said about this very flower, he having closely examd. many, (at one time “80 flowers”,) – vide “Trans, N.Z. Inst.” vols xi, p.419, and xiii, p.2841 and always 5 ridges. I ought, however, to have sent you some specimens of Orchids in spirits, which I had purposely put up for you but omitted! So much for those phænogams. With Mr. Baker I should speak differently, because I know my N.Z. Ferns (sp. nov) to be very distinct from those long known, & which he supposed them to be. At the same time, had I but dried spns only, as you have had there, I am pretty sure I should have made the same, or greater, mistakes. Mr. Baker did the same, some years years ago from dried spns., (tento, Lindsæa viridis, Hymenophyllum villosum, Dicksonia lanata, D. fibrosa, &c.,) which, however, he has lived to alter honorably in his later works. The 2 new (?) Cyatheas, for instance, and Dicksonia gracilis, are now well-known, as being very distinct from their old congeners, to travellers by coach going through those forests where they grow. I can point out the difference between Cyathea tricolor, & C. dealbata, living, 20 yards off: but all this will be made right anon. –
	3. List of Fungi: I had hoped you would have found more novelties among them: but still it is something to have sent you some that were new to N.Z.: those I had sent were new to me. You write of putting spns. of Fungi into spirits: this I could do with the smaller ones well enough: but (1) would pieces of the larger & soft ones serve? and (2.) could such be mixed in the vessel? I hope to have more for you ere long. –
	4. I am much pleased with your telling me of your being interested and amused* with the pamphlet of the “3 Lity. Papers”. Sir G. Grey (and many others of note) have done the same particularly Grey, in an excellent and timely letter (also, subscribing for 6 copies of the old Ruahine Mts. – another “rejection”! of the Wgn Board!) – for they had been sadly snubbed, – or snuffed out! by Dr Hector’s Wgn Board of Management N.Z. Inst. and this has culminated in my dropping tools here, – resigning the offices I have for 70 years held in our Branch. Instit. (see a local paper I post to you w. this) and I must fear our society will suffer. 
	A fortnight back the Wgn. branch held their Annual Meeting: Dr Buller, as President, gave a thoroughly good honest address, and took my part (I think) as to my Maori papers, so that Dr Hector was obliged to assent, and qualify a bit. But how he could say, my 3 papers were not refused, only delayed, in the face of the plain correspondence between us – I cannot understand. 
You can hardly conceive how vexed I was in finding from your letter my error re Sir J.E. Smith’s donation to the Linn. Socy.! and in also getting a letter from the Secy. L.S. to the same effect!! but what still vexes me, & that much more, is my crass stupidity, or forgetfulness, as to where I had picked it up. I have already gone over 10-12 Botl. works, but I cannot find it: but I will yet & then write Home. 
As to the Dactylanthus, – be sure I will do my best to get you specimens in spirits. I have lately seen a large root, or stock of it; the flowers, however, were all more or less smashed through a fall the bearer had: – anon. 
	In your acknowledging my letters & plants of last year, I noticed your omitting the little lot of Demoschænus seeds I sent you, – separately I think: did you get them?
	Among my late “finds” that gladdened my heart (in my lonely wanderings), amid rains and falls, & weariness and pains! were a Fagus n. sp., a really new sp., (this will wonderfully please you,) – a sweet little Panax, very near to anomalum, another Corysanthes, – a Caladenia, a Bolbophyllum, – a Thelymitra (or 2), – several Mosses, and Hepaticæ, & some Lichenes: – their descript. paper is gone to Dr. Hector for vol. xvi: – if it passes the “gods”!
Now that I shall have more time at command (for my 2 offices under our Instit. became very heavy as I had worked them), I intend to study our Mosses, which I have not yet done closely: by last Mail I ordered from Wesley Hedwigs & Schaegrichen’s work on Mosses, – Wilson’s Bryology & Hooker’s Jungermannia – all very expensive works now. 
	I have just written a letter, & a paper on a Fungus, to Mr Marquand, the Hony. Secy. of a Socy. at Penzance, & have requested him, if it be published by them in their “Trans.” to send you a copy. 
	And now I must close. I hope you are still enjoying good health, &c, &c, &c, I am pretty or very well, and with best kindest remembrances,
Believe me, Ever,
		Very truly Yours,
			Wm Colenso. 

PS: I find you have asked “when I was born,” &c. To the first: A.D. 1811. To the second, (“&c”) I don’t know what to say! Good-bye. WC. 
* “amused”! aye, & so was I, while writing it, often thinking of you & the ship’s co., & Ross, & the sailors calling that mangrove Estuary – “Muddy Muddy” – Have you forgotten it?
 # _______________


12 July 1884
Napier, N. Zealand
July 12/84
My dear Hooker, 
	I had quite determined last week to send you some seeds by this month’s out-going S.F. Mail. I had collected most of them in the autumn (May) while up in the woods, and I should have despatched them last mo. but for a very severe attack of Bronchitis caught in returning by train (70 miles) which laid me up for 3 weeks; indeed, a little wee bit more – and I should have crossed the burn, – or Ocean! I felt doubly vexed about it, for (1) I had enjoyed excellent health up in the sub-alpine woods nearly a month (as I usually do) though extra exposed, of course, &c, &c, away from one’s own home; and (2) I greatly wished to send the seeds to you at once, as some of them were what you had wished to have – including Ixerba which gave me a deal of trouble, as it only grows far away in the dense little visited forests of the mountainous interior, on the N.W. side of Waikare Lake (see Map), – of course exclusive of Bay of Islands hab. I enclose a memo of the seeds in the packet, also a small spn. of my new Fagus – as I know this in particular will please you, from your old practical knowledge in the field (or fields) of our S. Beeches, as well as from your labours in describing them: I have large & fine spns. also of this for you, which shall be sent ere long w. specimens of several other plants, and a further lot of Hepat. & Fungi for Cooke & Mitten. I hope Mitten has found time to go over the lot sent last year, & that I may soon hear something of them. This day I sent to Dr Knight spns. of some new Lichens, & among them a larger Sphærophoron (S. angulatum), that has been recently kindly determined by him for me (as to spores, &c.) he is such an excellent microscopist & has a good instrument. I cannot tell you how glad I am to have renewed our correspondence – after 20 years silence, yet living so near each other, and both working con. amor. in the same field! I ventured a letter to the Dr last mo., and he very cordially and promptly replied, – and so the old broken or disjointed bone is set again! May it prove to be stronger than ever – !  I have been also hard at it! fighting in our 2 Locals, – (1) against the wretched fanatical Teetotallers w. their “Local option”, – who have just closed 4 Hotels in the woods on the Royal Mail Coach Lines (where I have often stayed many weeks) and now there are none for 40-50 miles! And also, (2) against a Romish priest (I enclose a copy of this letter in the packet of seeds, as it may interest you a bit; it has again procured me the black looks, and uncourteous “passings by” of the priests & Levites all round! – this, of course!! I have also during the last 3 weeks, been daily visiting a poor fellow in cond. cell here for murder (w. & 3 ch!) he is to die on 15th – a sad case in every respect. ––
	I shall also post w. this to you a copy of my last Botl. paper (“author’s copy”) in “Trans. N.Z. Inst.,” vol. xvi, – which however you may have already seen in that vol. from Hector. My 2 other written but unpublished “Ruahine” papers are now being printed here & are nearly ready, – advanced to 64 p.; I have added largely to them in the shape of “Notes” (of a popular char. to please the Colonists) and, as I have mentioned you repeatedly throughout, I have ventured to put your honoured name down in the list as a Subsr. (Don’t scold me!) – in company w. Sir G. Grey’s (“6 copies”), Dr Buller’s, Prof. Hutton’s, Judge Gillies, & a few others of note as I felt here, that had you been nearer, or had time allowed to ask, you would willingly have done so. Of course there will be (in your case) nothing to pay. 
	I have upwards of 200 copies subscribed for which will go a good way towards paying for the mechanical part of the Work, – all such being dreadfully dear out here, as well as long in the doing. 
	I have long had it on my mind to ask you whether, in case of my decease, you would accept for Kew all my specimens, good & bad, dupls, trash, scraps, and all? Some 1000d’s of spns. mostly unsorted, unnamed, &c. Among them would no doubt be desiderata: & all should be sent to Kew free of expense. Let me know. 
	And now my dear Hooker to your two letters! recd. from you since I last wrote (Feb. 27) – viz Feby. 12 & May 7, – this latter only lately recd., and for both I thank you much. (I hope mine to you of Feby. 27 – per March S.F. Mail hence – safely reached you. I see you do not mention it). 
	In yours of Feby. 12, you gave me the addl. sad news of the loss of the 2nd lot of Kumara Tubers. I regret this & still hope to be able to send you more when I can timely get them from the Maori growers. This past season has been a total failure (they tell me), but only in a very few places were they planted, every year becoming less and less so among them. The new little Orchid turned out (as you supposed) a Corysanthes, of which genus I was fortunate enough to gain another sp. nov., w. some others – a Bolbophyllum, & a Thelymitra (see descripts. in Botl. paper herewith). I have spns. for you in spirits, to be sent with my next lot of plants. 
	In yours of May 7th, re “Cordylines” you say: – “1. You maintain that the S. Island plant is not C. indivisa.” Surely you mistake for I could never have said so, not knowing the S. Island plant; and as Forster never set foot on the N. Island, his plant could only have been obtained in the S. one. 
	Then you go on to say, – “The only good specimens of it that I have, are some from Mt Egmont, & Lyall’s from Thomson’s Sound”. I, however, had sent some to Kew from Ruahine mountain range., Hawke’s Bay, (which you also ackn. in Bot. N.Z., & in HandBook). I hope to obtain you some seeds of this plant, to be sent w. next lot. I know nothing of all the S. Island spns. or vars., – never having seen any spns. 
	I fear it will be an impossible job to obtain from the distant mountain forest “the trunks of Tree Ferns w. their Fronds,” – that is, of those you wish to have. C.C. dealbata, medull. & Cunnii, & Dicks. squarrosa, are common enough and at hand comparatively. I have never seen, D.D. fibrosa, lanata, &c., growing, since I discovd. them in 1842, & my following visit thither, in 1844.  So, also, of several of the Cordylines. I would willingly give £10., or more, to obtain such for you. There is no one here (skilled hand) I could employ, and I cannot do it myself, but I will bear it in mind, & if it ever can be accomplished it shall be. 
	I wholly agree w. your remark re Baker and the ferns; (Ditto ditto, re Prof. Oliver & the phænogams I sent,) – viz “where he (B.) finds them identical w. what we have, what can he do, but say so?” – but, my contention is that they are not “identical”, i.e. C. medullaris is not C. polyneuron. D. fibrosa is not D. antarctica; D. gracilis is not D. squarrosa. C. tricolor is not C. dealbata; & so on: though they may seem so at home, dried spns., and at first sight. Let them be closely compd. & examd. – venation, hairs, scales, texture, &c., and consid. together w. my distinctive chars., as shown by me in my long descripts. of them, in “Trans. N.Z. Inst. I only contend for our N.Z plants described by me, as being diverse from the other long-known and allied species, having proved it over & over w. the living and indigenous specimens around me; it may be, that the differential characters that I have detected and given, may not (by some) be considered as specific ones, – this I will not dispute; such may constitute only varieties: these, however, are the constant natural differences that I have pointed out. 
	Just so, in these new (?) ferns, now described by me – Lomaria oligoneuron, Lindsæa trilobata; and Polypodium rufo-barbatum; no doubt Mr Baker will again (at first sight) deny their being valid species. One thing however, is certain: – i.e. if I am wrong, you will have to amend your published chars. of our Ferns and so far I shall have been of service. And I may further observe, in writing on this subject to you – my old often proved & valued friend – that I cannot shut my eyes to two facts bearing hereon: – 1. that Mr. Baker made similar errors on Ferns of mine (& of others too) in past years. Ex. gr. Hymen. villosum Lindsæa viridis, Polypodium sylvaticum, etc., though lately restored by him, & inserted in his pubd. Papers. And, 2. – that this is just exactly what ½ doz. of that chattering neophyte-botanists here in this Country, N. & S. of me, have done! and published in our Papers, &c., concerning my new ferns, &c., &c., (having moved thereto by sheer envy – as I take it), – although they have been obliged to allow – that they had never seen my ferns! – and for their conduct some of them have been privately taken to task by their patrons. 	You cannot form a correct idea of how these fellows, – first schoolmasters, then dubbed “Science-teachers”, (Pshaw!) then “Professors” &c., – how they have banded together against me.! and that (as far as I know) only because of the success that has attended my labours in the dense unvisited forests and ravines, where these precious carpet Knights (who make so much fuss of a one-day’s outing with a lot of ladies!) dare not show their noses!! They write over & over, usques ad nausm. of the introduced Brit. weeds, & such easy compilations – and Hector publishes their trash (some of it) in, the “Trans.”! (through influence of “Board”). They also write I know, to Kew, – and I regret to see Mr Baker too readily adopting their views of my ferns &c. Those are the Tyros whom I had in view when I wrote p.32 in my “3 Literary Papers”, and they know it. Gods! how I helped them all at first. This their old letters to me will show. They belong to the cunning mole-working class so well described by Sir Wm Fox as “Brain-suckers”! But enough of this. 
	You wish for “Dracophyllum seeds or any Epacrideæ.” D. does not grow in this District, only in Interior (Taupo country) and on the tops of the Ruahine Range (now under snow) among the seeds I sent are a few Epacrideæ, as Cyathodes, & Leucopogon also Gaultheria. You say, “you have Colensoa growing but not yet flowered.” This plant has given me a world of trouble! I have had it under pot culture nearly 3-4 years, but it won’t flower! It grew up some 3½-4 ft. then I cut it down, it is living & growing, but w. leaves smaller & pale, not strong & healthy-looking. I think it wants the peat, or black swamp moss, of its N. hab. Another peculiarity (common to a few of our more rare plants) is its being so excessively local. You enq. “If Clianthus had ever been found wild yet?” The only spot that I found it really wild in, was that small islet we landed on in our voyage (!!) up the Kerikeri R. Bay of Islands. (Have you forgotten it? You took spns.) I believe that it is, or was, really wild at the N. One strange feature connected w. it is that here, though it bears fruit abundantly & sheds 1000d’s of seeds, I never noticed any of them to grow around the parent plant, though if taken & sown in our gardens they grow well & rapidly. 
	Among my recent spoils that I prize, is another Panax (?Nothopanax) in fruit only at present which I believe to be the true P. longissimum so long desired by us both, and everlastingly sought by me. I know that Buchann. (Trans. N.Z. Ins. vol ix, p.520). has given a plate of what he believed to be the sp. in fruit, but I doubt its correctness, and were it not that he has done so, I should give this of mine as P. longissm. vera, but as he has – this will be another sp., – it resembles B’s. a little in fruit, but pyrenes. are differently formed & leaves very much longer, &c., &c., – but more anon. I only recently acquired it & now that I know my tree, I shall be sure to visit her again. But it is such a desp. job in the woods, to get at a flg. spn. on tall trees! in this case I had to engage a young man and return some miles, the next day into the forest. I have also a new Hoheria that has pleased me much, a very handsome and distinct shrub; I have named it sexstylosa; its styles are long, crumpled and very shaggy. Of both plants, I have good spns. for you, and hope yet to secure ripe fruit. 
	Re Dactylanthus – was supposed to be found on roots of Melicytus: this was cut away, sail & all & brought me in the rough, but sadly shaken & bruised (smashed up!) – on close examination I saw it only rested on that root. This was cut off Apl/82, & the spot visited again Jany/83, – “tuberous mass” found uninjured, but no fresh buds or flowers developed. A forked root 2 in. rd. from that “mass” was traced 5 feet down thro’ loose pumice gravel, without finding the end, at further point it was as thick as the thumb, & w. hardly any rootlets the whole length. This is all I can tell you at present. I yet hope to gain your specimens. ––
	Thanks for your kind remark re the R.S. I cannot say that I had quite forgotten it but I certainly did not expect to be elected this past year. I hope I may this coming year – if I live till then. Like some, their good & “great expectations” may come too late!
	A few days ago I rec. another souvenir from Kew, a copy of your “Report” for /82 – I thank you for your kind remembrance. Much of its content has largely interested me, particularly your Enumn. of Palms! (What would I not give to see them!) I notice, that our solitary N.Z. Palm has again been re-christened – Areca = Rhopalostylis: I had nearly sent you some of its nuts. In enumeratg. them at p.11, you have a strange mistake – “Plants (!) in Kew, 420” – for Palms. You seem to have any amount of uphill Sisyphean labour – which can never become less: climate, soil, smoke, &c. I fully sympathize w. you in your regrets – would that you had such a climate as this – H. Bay. Be sure to let me know what seeds you may wish for. 
	An acquaintance applied to me lately to know where he could get seeds of our Aracauria, (he had received a letter from Germany, asking for them. I told him, N.Z. had none: – but 2 in Australia & 1 Nk. Island (here also in our gardens). Today, however, in looking into Bentham’s Fl. Austral; VI / 243 – I find that B. says, the genus is in N.Z. This is new to me: if correct, which of our plants (Pines) is it?

(17th) And now, my dear Hooker, having spun you a terrible long yarn (wearisome perhaps to you?) I must close. I hope you are well & this may find both you & yours so – I am pretty well: had a trial, 2 days ago, to go w. dying man, on to scaffold! Look out for all your lots. 1. Box seeds; 2. Author’s copy. 3. Illustrated paper & 4. this. 
	And believe me,
		Yours sincerely,
			W. Colenso. 

July 17, 1884
Memo of Seeds. ––
Rhipogonum scandens
Muehlenbeckia adpressa. 
Ixerba brexioides. 
Leucopogon fasciculatus. 
Cyathodes acerosa (?)
Gaultheria antipoda, var. red
      Do           Do	  ––  white
Gahnia
Fagus spiculata, Col. 
Panax microphyllum, Col. 
 Hydrocotyle concinna, Col. 
 Coprosma ––	(sp. nov?)
 Alseuosmia pusilla, Col. 
Gunnera strigosa, Col. 
Drimys. 
Pratia. 
Aristotelia racemosa. 
I have carefully dried them all, & put them up in brown coarse paper, thinking it better,     (free from acids)
 recent discoveries. W.C. 

Remarks on seeds of new sp., – & others. 
Alseuosmia pusilla – a very small & simple shrub, 6-10 in. high, bearing the largest oblong berries of any of the known sp. Damp woods, hidden among ferns. 
Hydrocotyle concinna, an elegant sp., well fitted for a bedding plant in damp shady places, grows largely and fast & runs over all things. Damp shady woods. 
Pratia (var.) another elegant plant well fitted for bedding; mats the soil. 
Cyathodes? acerosa – difft. from the common kind, & all the known vars., 6-7 ft. high, dark grey, flowers small & ochraceous; bears drupa plentifully, dry stony woods. 
Gaultheria (red-fruited) a tall thick growing shrub, 6-8 ft. high. (White-fruited) nearly as large; dry hills. 
Leucopogon, seems a little different from the common L. fasciculatus, a tall shrub 10-12 feet. 
Coprosma – a large shrub or small tree, 12-18 feet high, with large leaves, &c, – believed to be a sp. nov.?
Fagus apiculata, Col (see small spns. sent herewith.) For Description see “Trans. N.Z. Inst.,” vol. xvi. 

Specimens of all the sp. nov., &c., will be shortly forwarded. 
 # 


10 August 1884
Napier, New Zealand,
	August 10th, 1884. 
My dear Hooker,
I wrote to you by our last month’s S.F. Mail, and sent you a few items: I hope all may safely reach you. –
I have just put up a book-packet for you, (and one also to Secy. Linn. Socy.,) containing copies of my little “Ruahine” book – just published. I think I must have mentioned it in my last. I hope you may find time to dip into it a bit, as I fancy some portions will interest you. At all events your name and that of your honoured Father are frequently used. 
But what I wish, particularly today at this time is, to ask you to forgive my unauthorized putting down of your name in the List of subscribers: (of course, in my so doing it was never for a moment supposed that you were to pay any subscription: no, No. I did it, because – (1) I believed if you were nearer and I had asked it as a favour you would readily have granted it. (2) our chief & oldest settlers had done so among whom is your old “patron” Sir George Grey, (who had early and promptly written to me from his island home at Kawau, to set his name down for “6 copies”) – Dr Buller, Professor Hutton, Sir G.S. Whitmore, our Bishop, our 3 local M.P.’s., & a lot of others – and so I dared to set your name among them. 
Last night I received a very nice note from Sir G. Grey at Wellington, speaking very highly of this little book, how greatly he had been interested in reading it, how much it had reminded him of old times, &c., &c., and requesting his remaining 4 copies to be sent to him there as he wished to distribute them to the Pub. Libraries. His steamer on her way S. from Auckland last week, called here and I sent him 2 copies (first issued) on board. –
Since my last I have written to an acquaintance in the mountainous interior, who, in reply, has promised to get me seeds of Cordyline indivisa. Our winter is just ending, weather fine: thermr. 56o, willows coming into full leaf, & peaches into blossom. –
I hope this may find you quite well, and in a good humour, & so inclined to be forgiving. 
Bel. me, my dear old friend,
		Yours truly, W. Colenso. 
 # 


12 September 1884
Napier, N. Zealand,
	Septr. 12th. 1884. 
My dear Hooker,
	By last month’s S.F. Mail hence I wrote you a scrap note, & sent you a little book: and I think I then said, I would try to get you some seeds of Cordyline indivisa. I have tried – 3 inland places – and have only just succeeded in getting a very few, from one place; the sender (a careful fellow) saying, – “the shepherds had collected a lot, but they were nearly all empty husks, seeds fallen out.” – but I am trying again. 
	I have also obtained some other seeds, which I send, – and to which I would call your especial attention (Hear my yarn, first.) –
	The Nikau palm (old Areca, new Rhopalostylis) is very scarce in this district. But I had early heard (40 yrs. ago!) of an isolated clump of them on a hill near the E. Coast. I had always wished to go there, but it was miles away from my tracks, & from natives; and then, some 20 years ago, the spot became the property of a Settler – no friend of mine. However, I have lately succeeded in getting some good seeds; – and, to me, they seem very different from those of Rh. sapida: red, narrower, longer, &c. – Can these be seeds of Rh. Baueri? the Norfolk Island species. This you will soon ascertain, and please let me know. I have no description of that species. 
	I also send some more seeds of Ixerba: hope the last sent reached Kew living. ––
	The seeds are in a little tin box, to be posted w. this. 
	And now for a new fern! I can scarcely call it mine, – as I did not discover it in the woods, – it was sent to me w. some others, to be named, &c. – I have been examining & studying it, and have satisfied myself (quæ not Mr. Baker!) that it is new, – not only to N.Z. but to science, i.e. as far as my fern-books will carry me. Its nearest ally is, I think, H. marginatum, H. et Grev. – also H. parvifolium, Baker. I send you, enclosed, a few specimens, (the best I have,) and my description of it; which will be published here, in next vol. of “Trans. N.Z. Inst.”, H. melanocheilos, Col. – and if you can get it published early for me there, (in Proceedgs. Lin. Socy., or in same Mag., and a good figure, &c., given of it, which I will gladly pay for,) I will thank you!
	I have a parcel of dried plants getting ready for you: but I wish first to make my spring visit to the woods, for a few more marked things: I leave N. at end of this month. 
	I hope the Alseuosmia seeds I sent you will grow: my plants from the wood are putting forth flowerheads, already ½in. long, and apparently different from our known ones, – lateral not axillary, and exceedingly glabrous, no vestige of hairiness, and all parts (like the leaves) red striped: I am pleased with this. 
	I have often regretted, that both Bentham (Fil. Australs.) and yourself should have omitted Norfolk Island in your General Southern Botany, – especially Bentham. Do you know of any flora of that Island? Was there not an early one by Endlicher? Is it wholly out of print? –
	Hoping this may find you and all yours well, –– and Ever & always w. kindest regards,
		Believe me,
			Yours truly,
			W. Colenso. 

PS: The spns. of the little fern are my very best! I have twice written for more, & am promised some, if I get them, I will send to you. 
 # 


31 December 1884 
Napier, N. Zealand,		
December 31, 1884
My dear Hooker
About a week ago I received your prized and most welcome letter of Nov. 3rd (I called it, my Xmas-Box!) – a long one too! Too much so, I fear, for your very valuable time. I have read it, and re-read it, every time finding something new & interesting. Very pleased was I to find that the last lot of seeds had reached you in safety, – some, at all events, living. I will have another try at Coprosmas, Alseuosmia, &c., if I can get these latter – & I will pack some in clay, some in coarse sugar, and some dry – anyhow, I’ll do my best, and (as always for you) con amore. 
But I must mind what I am about & endeavour to write clearly & regularly. 
Ever since I received your letter I have been going to write to you – to go by this S.F. Mail: but I have been very busy over another & similar job, which I have only just finished: a Paper for Linnaean Society, (don’t start!) containing descriptions of a few new plants: this Paper and some spns., and a letter to the Secretary will also go by this mail. In Novr. I received a very kind letter from the Secy. (in reply to mine), and so I have written this paper. Some, in particular, of the said plants and spns. now sent, will, I know, interest you greatly, especially my new Hoheria – H. sexstylosa, with its shaggy styles, &c., – a novel Olearia, and a fine Pimelea from the mountainous interior (a few flowers enclosed). Several of these plants only came to hand very recently, while I was engaged in my Paper; but seeing they were novelties (at least to me, and not included in Bentham’s Fl. Austral.) I gladly added them to it; which of course, increased and prolonged my work, and drove me up into a corner (of this year!) in my writing to you. There are some spns. of the Hoheria specially for you, I have told Mr. Jackson so, but as you are one of the Council, I hope you will see them all, my Paper, and letter also. 
When I last wrote to you (in Sept.) I was going inland to my old forest haunts, but I could not get away so early as I had intended, and so got no seeds of that Hoheria – which vexed me, more than a wee bit! This tree flowers very late (May), and, if I live, I will be able to get some seeds next winter – say, June, with some other things: Another great vexation was the loss of my marked new Alseuosmia in the forest! (it was well I had brought away a few living plants last season, which have done well here and are flourishing.) But those in that forest, well: when I got back, in Oct., I found the Scandinavian foresters had actually cut a tramway over and through that very bed of Alseuosmias, – not one had escaped on either side! You can guess my feelings, – I could have sat down and cried – but I’ll have another desperate search, yet. 
My Colensoa, here in a pot, is livg. Yours – will not flower! I purpose obtaining some veg. humus, or swamp mud, for it, – as that is what it flourishes in, in its circumscribed local hab. at the N. 
I have begun to get ready a box of spns. for you; several of new Phænog., but mostly Crypts, – Hep. & Fungi: but as I intend leaving next week for the woods I shall not send it yet. I would that Mitten had worked up, or given me some account of, those already sent: as it is, however, both you and he must expect, not only repeated duplicates, but triplicates, &c., &c. ––
And now I come to my great want – a long-standing one, viz. a good Microscope; with which I can investigate our Mosses & Hep. I have long been hesitating (partly owing to cost, partly to my age, &c.,) – but, Jacta est alea! I have now passed the Rubicon. Enclosed, please find a Dft. for £40 for that purpose: £20 – £25 may suffice: if so, all right: I look to you to get me a suitable one, (which, I dare say, you can both well & easily manage through your skilled assistants, or friends). I have received lots of Catalogues, from Browning, Collins, and various opticians, – indeed, too many, they bother me, both as to the great variety of instruments; and their prices, and qualities; and I do not exactly like to order “right away” from any of those makers. I have long had two small compound ones, (one being an early present from a lady you well knew – Lady Franklin!) and one of these has done me great service,																	[Goodnight: XII!] 

(Jany. 1, 1885.)
only; unfortunately, I cannot use its higher power, as it projects onto and touches the object before it is quite in focus! and, then, again, from its old fashion vertical construction I have great difficulty w. an opaque object, – as I cannot throw the light required in underneath. I have formerly used Dr. Spencer’s fine binocular, but that is kept in his consultation room, and now that he is the Mayor of this town, &c., &c., – neither are so readily accessable. It almost seems ridiculous for a man nearly ½ way ’tween 70 & 80 to go in for such a thing! – Still, as I have ever wished to die in harness, – I don’t expect to get a scolding from you. – 
Mr. Baker has amused (or surprised) me, with his remark on my last little Hymen. – H, melanochilos; however, in a word, I cannot agree with him – that is, if his own descript. of “Frisch. Armstrongii” (Syn. Fil., ed. 2. p.465,) is to be depended on: I have never seen this fern. Besides, B. has also given a description of another (?) small N.Z. fern (l. c. p.464) – “Hym. Cheesemanii”, (also unknown to me) – Yet Kirk (whom B. approvingly cites in his memo. you sent me) says – “that Hym. Ch. is ident. w. Trich. Armstgii, – and B. allows has this right, – partly so, at least, – and refers me to a bad fig. of Kirk’s in “Trans. N.Z. Inst.,” – which does not accord w. my fern. There is very little, scarcely any, affinity between my little Hymenm. & those 2 (?) ferns, – that is, according to Baker’s own descriptions of them; for as I have said in my last to you, the affinity of Hym. melanochilos, is w. H. marginatum, H.R. & Gr., and a small one of Baker;’s own – H. parviflorum,! from the E. Indies. However, B. could possibly unite mine & his, I cannot conceive: – his, “flabellately divided, sori 1-4 to a frond, obconical, immersed, w. rounded, ciliated lips:” – mine, “simple, rarely bifid, sori single, elliptic, free, margins entire black-bordered shining:” but then B. unites H. Tunb. w. H. Wilsoni. Mentioning H. Tunbridg., I see that Bentham in his Fl. Aust., under this fern, does not give N.Z. as one of its habs., – though he does of its allies. I notice that Baker, in his Syn. Fil. (l.c.) gives – “Hook. Ic. t. 1132”, for Hym. Cheesemanii: could you send me this plate? The infinitiessimal scrap (tip of a barren segment!) B. enclosed, is of no use: I have lately received a lot of very poor & dead spns. of my little fern, but though unfortunately dead, thay are all very similar, simple & rarely bifid, and never w. more than 1. invol. to a frond, & that as I have given it, and not as Baker’s. I painfully unravelled these specimens from a big slab, or “turf”, of old dead tree moss (Dicuemon calycinum), sent to me from the N. At first, I could not see the minute fronds of the little Hymenm., so completely hidden among the dead Moss, and only got them out by soaking and patience! I am still seeking better specimens which I hope to obtain. –
Did I tell you, in my last, of my recent new & big outlay in Cryptog. books? H. Brit. Jungerm. (long desired!), Hedvig & Schwæg., 6 vols., Lindens Plagiochilæ. (I had previously obtained, Ekart Dumont., Synop. Hepaticm. – C. Mueller’s Synops. Musc. Frondosm., Hk. et Grev. Ic. Film. – Beddowe’s B. Ind. & S. Ind. Ferns, 3 vols. 4to, Van der Bosch’s Hym. Jav., &c., & for Liby. of Socy. Wilson’s Bryologia Brit. (£4.4.0!). I am vexed w. the very scattered indices of Hedw. & Schw., the non-arrangement , and the errata – noticed & un-notd. However, I hope to use all by & by, with my lots of Mosses & Hep. – all unarranged & unexamined. 
Curiously enough, this copy of H. Brit. Jung. had belonged to several gentlemen in succession, all well-known to you: – 1. The elder Janson; 2. Kippist; 3. F. Currey, all Linn. Socy. Membs. In it (fastened) is a pleasing letter from K. to C. ., w. the book (written 1877), in which Dr. Darwin is also mentioned. It is a first-rate copy, & is in good condn. but very dear. 
By the way – here is a question I have long been desirous of putting to you. Is there not an error (of yours) at p.497, “Hd. Book N.Z. Flora”? where you say (14 l. from bottom), – “Now let the spn. be held up w. the side from which the roots descend away from the observer, this surface is called the ventral, that towards the observer the dorsal. The third rank of leaves (stipules), if present, is invariably dorsal, and the rootlets often grow from the base of the stipules.” – With me, all this should be the very opposite, i.e. ventral for dorsal, &c., – unless your menaing of “dorsal”, here in Hep., is the contrary of your meaning of that word under Filices. Those sentences have plagued me & a few others exceedingly. At p.499 (l.c.) you speak of sad want of materials: well, I shall have a rare lot for you, both old & new. Some lovely little beauties have pleased me exceedingly of late, and among them a curious little Gymnomitrium, & not a few Aneuræ & Symphyogynæ: I have also Hypmum. inflatum in fruit, with several new Hookeriæ, & a Bartramia described. Is “Bridel. Bryolog. Univ.” a good & useful work? ––– Ditto ditto, Boots “Carex”? 
I have a sweet little Arthropodium just now flg., – one from the woods, raised from seed. I believe it to be distinct from A. candidum, Raoul, its leaves are 3 lines wide, 8-9in. long, same length as Scape, w. 9-10 foliaceous fl. leaves or bracts, large 3-4 in. long, 2 l. wide: Flowers single, pedicels 1 in, including joint; perianth on opening wholly reflexed, like a Turk’s Cap Lily; filaments bearded in part only, about 2/3rds., naked 1/3rd from base, & w. hairs short (or none) at top near anther, but swelling & bushy in the middle, hairs moniliform & largely clavate, branched & fascicled: anther nearly white & recurved at tip. All this is different from Raoul’s descry. & fig. – there the filaments (magnified) are hairy alike throughout, & sparingly so, leaves & bracts short & narrow, &c, &c. I only examd. this a little this mg., – it first opened its lowest flower yesterday, & another this mg., & I find that a flower only keeps open one day: but more anon. I hope to get good seed from this for you. 
And now I must tell you of one of my “finds”: – While inland in Octr., I again visited (twice in rain!) one of my favourite objects discovd. by me 3 years ago,! a Fern Tree (Cyath. dealb.) almost entirely surrounded below & for some way up: by a Panax (P. arboreum) – both large trees, and very healthy. I have attempted a drawing (in the rain), but, alas! my Drawing powers are gone in the loss of my thumb: I think I must send it to you, – or Linn. Society w. full descript., & so get it (the poor outline skeleton) filled up at Home: I took every measurement, &c. To me it is a doubly pleasing object , – as showing how naturally this Panax (in accordance with its Order) grows or enwraps the Cyathea, by sending down branches like roots, something like the bark of the cut limb of a healthy tree, gradually encroaching on all sides & ultimately covering over the wound. ! It is by no means uncommon to see a Cyathea & a Panax in a kind of apparent junction on a portion of one side (Siamese-twin fashion or hardly that). I said to the pair, – “Ah! I would give £10. to have you at Kew.” One of the prizes I am going in quest of is my big Gastrodia (2 ft. 9 in., w. a raceme of 15 in., & 36 fl. !) – mentioned at p.62, of my Ruahine paper: may I be in luck!
I trust I shall not have wearied you w. this my New Year’s gift! there is one thing good respecting it, you won’t have to ansr. but a very small bit of it: this now with very kindest regards & best wishes, believe me, my very dear old & good friend,
Yours faithfully, 
		W. Colenso. 
12 February 1885 


The annual general meeting of members of the Hawke’s Bay Philosophical Institute was held last evening, at the society’s rooms, Browning Street, the Bishop of Waiapu in the chair. There was a good attendance. After the confirmation of the minutes the secretary, Mr A. H. Hamilton stated that the Council recommended rule 4, as printed in the last annual report, should be expunged as ultra vires. The rule provided that original papers read before the Napier branch of the institute might be published locally, partly or wholly, at the expense of the branch. As the rule was one the Napier Council were not competent to give effect to, he would move that it be expunged as suggested. After some discussion Mr M. R. Miller moved an amendment authorizing the publication in Napier of original papers not included in the yearly volume of transactions, issued under the authority of the management of the New Zealand Institute, provided the consent of the management were first obtained. The amendment was seconded by Mr H. Hill, and carried. The report and balance-sheet were then read and adopted. The report showed that six ordinary meetings and 12 meetings of the Council had been held during the past year, and that the total membership of the institute was 119, as against 113 at the date of the last report. The balance-sheet showed receipts for the year of £329. 9s. 11d., with an expenditure of £301. 5s. 3d for the same period, leaving a credit balance of £28. 4s 8d. The following officers for the ensuing year were elected: – President, Mr W. Colenso; vice-present, Mr T. Tanner; honorary secretary, Mr A. H. Hamilton; honorary treasurer, Mr J. N. Bowerman; auditor, Mr T. K. Newton; Council, Dr. Spencer and Messrs S. Locke, N. Heath, H. S. Tiffen, F. W. O. Sturm, and H. Hill. Messrs H. Williams, J. Dinwiddie, E. Goodall, and J. Tuke were elected members of the institute. The usual vote of thanks brought the meeting to a close. 

Napier, N. Zealand,
	Feby. 12, 1885. 
My dear Hooker
	Just a line by this direct frozen-mutton-carrying steamer “Ionic” – to say, I have sent you by her a fine fat lamb, and hope you may receive it in first-rate order, and walk into it accordingly: may you like it as well as you did your Falkland Islands’ Beef of your own hunting – “carne can cuero”! – vid. your own immortal sketch. 
	Last week I returned in excellent health and spirits from our highland forest, and glens, where I had been 3 weeks, – bringing w. me a lot of spoils (of course), & not a few for Kew; and among them several novelties, especially in Fungi & Hepat., and some seeds, which I purpose sending by next S.Fo. Mail. 
	I thought on you much & often while there, (alone, as to human society): how delighted you would have been among the Asteliæ – in glory and profusion! I have several spns. for you, but (as you have long ago truly observed) the diffy. is to match the ♂ & ♀ of these diœcious plants whose foliage is so similar, – more, I hope, anon. 
	I am sitting up with diffy. & in pain to write this to you, mail just closing – having been down w. lumbago 5 days. 
	While away in the woods the H.B. Phill. (Branch N.Z.) Institute elected me their President for 1885! – verily –––––
	Hope you are well, my last to you was on 31 Decr. – Excuse this. 
		Believe me
			Ever yours
				W. Colenso

W.C. proposed by Bishop of Waiapu (President) seconded by Dr. Spencer (Mayor) V.P. ditto (1884). 
 # _______________


8 April 1885 
Napier, N.Z.,
	April 8/85
My dear Hooker
Yours of Feb. 19th just now to hand. Lucky, too, for me! for I have been packing all day for my early flitting by rail to the woodlands tomorrow. I write at once in reply, as I find from this evening’s paper, that a mail for England will be dispatched hence tomorrow, to catch the “Ruapehu” now at Wellington: our usual monthly S.Frisco one not leaving until the end of this month: this letter will therefore necessarily be short. 
Your letter, a long one, is entirely about microscopes. You have given me lots of good first rate advice, and I heartily thank you: at one thing, however, I feel vexed – with myself, I mean – at having given you so much trouble, or, rather, stolen so much of your valuable time, in your writing me this letter. 
In one word: all I want is, such a mic. as you & your ever honoured Father, Mitten & Wilson have so long and successfully used, nothing more: as you say, – “a simple dissg. mic., costing £4 – £8”, or so: and, again, “one not exceedg. £10 – £12.” – that will do, exactly: never mind the over plus – anon. –
All I require is one that will enable me well & clearly to examine the teeth, &c., of Mosses, &c. I dread the very thought of going in for anything high deep and recondite! all that I leave for others – abler & younger men. Indeed, had the highest power of my present glass been usable, I believe I should have been content. 
I have lately been teased pretty much w. Rheumatism, but I have been working at putting-up lots of spns. for you of Fungi (small) & Hepaticæ: these, w. others, I hope to send off on my return from the woods, or shortly after. 
If I recollect aright, some time ago I had informed you of Dactylanthus having been found within (say) 40 miles of this place by a yg. acquaintance of mine: his first find, which he brought me, was much bruised & battered: he promised to get more, when he should have time, &c. On my recently telling him, I was putting up a case of spns. for you, & could also enclose his D. (if he had any), – I was a wee bit surprised to find, that he had some time back, sent them direct to you & had already had your reply. 
Now I must stop: late, very,
		Good Night!
		Yours very sincerely
			Wm Colenso. 
21 May 1885
Napier, May 21st. 1885. 
My dear Hooker,
	Three weeks ago, while up in the high interior woods, I received your very kind & thoughtful letter of March 8th. Just as on the last occasion (6 weeks back) – I was both vexed & pleased on reading it: vexed w. myself, at having given you all this extra bother, – and now, in addition thereto, Dr. Carpenter, also! Your & his great kindness in this matter I fear I can never repay. However, my note to you of 8th April per “Ruapehu”, (to hand, I should hope by this,) will have finally settled the matter of the microscope. One of the kind (or similar) you & your confreres used in Botanical work (which you had kindly mentioned) will serve me very well – as I shall never take up those higher pursuits & studies: I must leave all that for younger and more able hands. 
	I think I last wrote to you when on the very end of leaving Napier for the forests, (my old & favourite secluded haunts! where I am at Home.)  I was there nearly a month on this visit, and have gathered lots for you of the smaller Crypts. – Fungi & Hepaticæ. These (with others secured before) have now been put up for Kew, and I hope to send them off shortly (w. some Phænogams) by next frozen mutton steamer hence.
	With this, however, I shall send you a registered box of seeds, – some of them I hope may prove desiderata; a few are sps. nov., of which you shall, also, have spns. by-&-by. 
	As I am very desirous of your receiving these seeds in a living state, (seeing they have cost me so much time & labour, &c., &c.) I have taken extra precaution in putting them up; some have been cleaned & well-dried; others are in their berry, but also well-dried; some are put up separately in dry pulverized earth, in a tin box; and a few (by way of trial) in coarse brown sugar, – and all w. plenty of well dried “dunnage.”–
	In box No. 1, (in dried Earth,) are 4 whole berries of Alseuosmia pusilla; also, some berries of Pratia, and fruits of my newly-discovered Coprosma – C. heterophylla. 
	In another small box, in sugar, are Alseuosmia pusilla, Coprosma heterophylla, and C. rufescens, sp. nov. 
	There are also others, – as Hydrocotyle colorata, sp. nov., a handsome sp., – Gaultheria, Cyathodes, Gahnia, Ixerba, Olearia colorata, Solanum aviculare, &c. 
	Of this last (Solanum) I am almost ashamed! for, after all my exertions & writing both to Europeans in the Country places & to Maoris, I have only succeeded in getting these very few (& poor small berries!) now sent. It is most strange how quickly this large plant has disappeared; formerly the fruit was collected by the Maoris in kit-fulls & sold! – but I shall try again. –
	The sps. nov. have been fully described by me; part in this forthcoming vol. of “Trans. N.Z. Inst.” (now ready for issue), and part in my paper to be read in a few days at our Society’s next meeting, – & then, as usual, for the “Trans.” –
	Hydrocotyle colorata would make a handsome bedding plant, and so Pratia, which should have long ago been used at home for that purpose, it will certainly stand your frosts. 
	The little Alseuosmia has charmed me when in fruit; such a very small shrub & bearing its large bright-red berries so conspicuously. I now find them (the berries) to contain many more seeds than I had supposed and described; so many as 16 in one, 14 in another, & so on. – Those little plants, however, are rather difficult to detect in the dark shaded woods hidden among the thick growing green ferns and wood debris (Asplenm. bulbiferm. Lomaria fluviat., Hymenophyllm. demissum, &c.,). For a long time & after trotting many weary miles, in several days, I sought almost in vain! (in the wet, too! not over congenial for my Rheumatism.) at last I enlisted some children of the neighbouring Scandinavian settlers and through them I got a few, – the rain & cold weather hindering us. – (It snowed up there, while I was there – thermr. 42°. in my sitting-room; here yesterday & today it has been 65°. 
	I propose going thither again next month (though winter). I want to see same Hepaticæ in fruit, – and also, to get seeds (for you) of the late flowering Hoheria sexstylosa. 
	I trust Mitten has been at work on the last lot of Hepat. I sent you. 
	Hoping you are quite well, ditto your lady & family, and enjoying your Summer –
	I am, my dear Hooker,
		Very affy. Yours,
			Wm Colenso. 
P.S. 
I must leave it to you to make the very best possible apology for me to your good & kind friend Dr Carpenter. W.C. 
 # 


16 June 1885
Napier, New Zealand
June 16th, 1885. 
My dear Hooker,
	I wrote you by last Mail via S. Frisco., sending you a small box of seeds, which I hope may duly reach you safe and well. 
	I should not now write, only I have very recently received from a Maori on the Coast (whom I employed), a nice little box of seeds of Solanum aviculare), – which you wanted, and of which I could only send you a poor sample in the box. This lot I shall divide into 2 portions, – the remainder to go to you shortly w. box of Crypts, &c. 
	The Govt., at last! have been steadily & seriously pressing me, again to take up the Maori Lexicon – after just 15 years caring nothing about it! And I have in a manner assented, (but I will not take pay from them:) my last letter to them was posted here yesterday. I fear this will require all my (old & fading) energies both physical & mental! and so, Good bye to Botany! I already grieve over my assent: it may shorten or embitter my remaining days – as my heart is not now in that line. 
	By our last Lond. mail I received a letter from Secy. Linn. Sy., informing me of the decisions at Kew respecting my new (?) plants. Never was a man more surprised – aye shocked, upset! I have just written to him in reply. 
	Hoping you are quite well & working away, –
	I am, my dear Hooker,
		Yours truly,
			W. Colenso. 
P.S. I also send a small book packet (“author’s copies”) – in which you will find those Fungi, so kindly named by you & Dr. Cooke. 
 # 


9 October 1885
Napier, N. Zealand
	October 9th, 1885. 
My dear Hooker
	Thanks many & big, for all your kindnesses: – I am not able to write by this mail (closing), but purpose fully doing so by “Tongariro” leaving Auckland 25th: by her I hope to send your case of specimens, now nearly ready. 
	I have received 2 recent letters from you; to reply to, anon. One of July 5, and one of July 30th. Microscope arrived here 3-4 days ago, and (spite of my warning and precaution) those –––––––– fellows at the Customs must break open the case in quest of smuggled goods! (these Instruments do say no duty,) and they, or the shipping agents, in overhauling, managed to lose a part of the said Instrument! I have written 2ce and my man has been down searching closely in Customs’ examining shed – but nil!
I have just written to Ross, describing as well as I can from its empty cell or niche, and ordering “such another” – whatever it may be: and so I just send a line to you, as you may hear of it from R. All being well you shall hear fully from me per “Tongariro”. I am dreadfully busy, w. hand sore from so much writing: ditto chest. 
	With kindest regards,
		Yours faithfully
			W. Colenso
P.S. 
I send enclosed seeds: – spns. of Fern will be forwarded in case, per “Tongariro.” –––
 # 


14 October 1885

(Do not be alarmed at its length: You will not have to answer it.)
Napier, N. Zealand, 
October 14th, 1885
My dear Hooker
	Only 5 days back I wrote to you briefly by our S.F. Mail, then leaving Napier: and in it I said, I hoped to send your case of specimens and write by “Tongariro”, then advertised to leave Auckland (N.Z.) on 25th. Two days ago, I heard (suddenly!) of the big steamer “Arawa” coming here to load with frozen sheep, &c., on this day, and leaving here on 17th, and so I turned to with a will to get your case (so long promised, and so long taking in cargo!) off by her, and I shall finish it and send it on board tomorrow. 
	I hope you may find a few things to please you among the lot now sent. There are some hundreds of Fungi (mostly small), ditto of Hepaticæ, very few Mosses and Lichens (these Orders must follow some day), and sundry Phænogams and Ferns, – including most of my sp. nov. of which, however, I will not say anything at present, only, that I hope, in every case, my published description of them will be read, if not considered, – because I have usually pointed out their characters by which they differ from other species more or less closely allied, and I have examined all when fresh and on the spot. One thing, I think, you will allow, 347– that I have been working hard, abroad and at home, although it may be “great cry but little wool”. At the recent monthly meeting of our Society, while on the subject of Botany, I mentioned the specimens I had collected and was then getting ready for you, – stating (with almost a little too much of feeling!) that I had good reasons for believing such would prove to be the last! just 50 years of service. 
	The Lists of spns. now sent, and all the memoranda concerning them, you will find in the case. I shall pay its freight, insurance, and all shipping charges. There are yet a few more spns. somewhere here in store for you, but which I cannot find just now: unfortunately my dried spns. are unarranged (through sheer want of time) put aside in the many little bundles from several journeys. 
	I did fully, purpose to write you a very long letter by “Tongariro”, but as this better opportunity has turned up, I embrace it, although I cannot possibly write so largely at present, and shall not be able to reply so fully as I wish to your last two letters. 
	Of course you will have heard (and that perhaps officially) long before this can reach you, of the motion made here in our N.Z. Parliament, a few weeks ago, re a 2nd Edn by yourself (with additions) of your “HandBook, N.Z. Flora”: I trust you will be able to accede to this. – i.e. through your skilled and competent aids about you, – you supervising the work. I scarcely need say, that I will do all in my power willingly to aid you. Attempts have been made from time to time, by the affiliated branches of the N.Z. Inst. (down S.) to get our branch to agree with them, in asking our Col. Govt. to get a 2nd Ed. of the 1st part only of the Hd. Bk. published: this, however, we steadily refused, preferring the whole. 
	This Steamer (Arawa) is supposed to arrive at Home by 1st Dec. You may therefore receive my last week’s note by S.F. a fortnight earlier, and will have learned my mishap about the microscope: nothing fresh has transpired here since (I did not expect it), and I have had no time since to think about it, much less to look at it. I must be very busy for some days to come – exclusive of this heavy Dictionary work that dogs me incessantly. The intricate & voluminous Property Tax returns (seeming as if designed to entangle folks!) must be sent in to Wellington by 21st., – or, heavy penalties: – and I, who had worked hard last week for S.F. Mail, thinking to give this present time to that subject only, and then, afterwards, yours, have reversed that order and turned first to you. And there is nothing I more dislike and detest, than the making out those Returns, in which I have to give the cash-market value of every item of every iota, including Botanical specimens, &c., &c!! affirming to each (equal to an oath) with heavy fines if found tripping; and if anything is undervalued, then the Commissioner is empowered to take it! nolens volens, adding 10% thereto. Already I have been several times in the Reviewers’ Courts objecting to heavy impositions, and have at most invariably gained my cases – but then the expenses generally make it to be still heavier than the impositions, to say nothing of bother & loss of time!
	Besides your own kind letters, I received one from your “Assistant Director” Mr. Thiselton-Dyer, – a very nice note, thanking me for some seeds I had sent: please present my kind regards and thanks to him for his note. Anything I may yet be able to do for you and Kew in the way of seeds, I hope to do con amore: therefore you will not fail to specify your wants. 
	There is one thing I ought (perhaps) to have long ago mentioned to you: viz, re my letter to Mr Daydon Jackson (Secy. Linn. Socy.,) in reply to his to me; and perhaps I should have done so, but I did suppose at the time of writing it that you would be sure to see it. Should you not have seen it, and would like to know what I wrote, I will readily send you a copy; as I (smarting a little at the time) mentioned both you and Kew in it. –
	I think I must have told you of a fine copy of your Father’s Brit. Jungerm., that I had obtained from England; which copy was first – Janson’s then Kippist’s, then Currey’s, and contains an interesting Ms. letter from Kippist to Currey sent with the vol. Lately I have received a copy of La Billard. Nov. Holl. Plant., (a work I had long wished for!) this copy was Mr Dawson Turner’s and contains the original letter from La B. to Mr D. Turner, written in 1814, and sent with the 2 vols! ––
	I fancy you will think me very audacious with my descript. of this Queensland Brachycome as a sp. nov. It diff. however largely from all of Bentham’s in Flora Australis. I send you plenty of spns. – the achenes are of 2 kinds, and are very peculiar. –
	I notice what you say re your fine Kumara, and congratulate Lady Hooker and yourself on your acquired taste for your new esculent. Did I ever tell you of a nice mode of cooking them, often practiced by us in former days at the N. (where the root was in its prime), viz, wash & scrape and bake under a joint of meat (Yorkshire pudding fashion) try it – if not too plebeian! I sent you from hence: I had never seen them here, so far S., or, at all events, not for the last 30 years while at the N., they were common, and no mistake as to vars. – in shape, size, colour, taste, &c. You say, you greatly wish to see the “Colensoa” flowering, – as you “wanted it for Botan. Mag.” Have you forgotten the fine double plate by your father in Ic. Plantarum? Give a drawing of Hoheria sexstylosa (now sent) – it is well worthy of it. I have already written for fresh Areca (old n.) seeds or nuts: I now send some of last year’s – of 2 vars. 
	I also note what you have kindly said re the “Royal”. I have taken your advice (as a most wise prescription), and am not, and shall not allow myself to be, disappointed: it is rather too late in the day now for me. Some few years ago I should have greatly valued it. I sometimes think on the remarks I have heard & received (oral & written) from foreigners, – that had I been (say) a German – or done for some of the Continental Govts. and Societies, what I had so freely done for England, – I should have been made a Fellow of some ½ doz., societies or more, long ago. Indeed, I was not a little surprised at a remark made by Von Haast, when here last summer, & visiting me & seeing my work; he asked “If I had not received notice of my having been elected a member of some German Societies?” I replied “No”. I know that I vexed Bastian (Berlin) when here a few years back, because I refused to give him information as to Maori mythological lore, seeing that he would (do as others had done) mix it up with all manner of scrappy inconsequent stories he had already gathered – sweepings from all quarters!  But enough of this. 
	I am distressed in hearing of you, too, being subject to Lumbago. I sincerely hope you may never have it severely it is so obstinate, so painful on the least attempt at moving, which, in fact, one cannot do! and sometimes (out here) makes such lengthened unwelcomed visits – spinning out 3, 4, 5 weeks. I greatly dislike it, and guard against it (believing that “prevention is better than cure”) by (1) always wearing a silk bandage round middle; (2) never sitting down on a hollow or open back chair, at least not without throwing my cloak over it, which I usually carry on my arm for that purpose; (3) never stooping quickly to pick up any thing, not even in the woods, nor to poke the fire, &c., – to do this last I always go down like a camel on my knees; and (4) when I feel its approach, or fancy I do, I take an anodyne pill at night, – one of my own prescribing, of nearly 40 years standing, – of which I have taken 1000’s & also found relief; sometimes consecutively for 3-4-5 weeks. 
	Here it is, Rx. Comp. Ipecac. pulv. iii drachms, Comp. Ext. Colocynth. vii grains, Sapo Cast. viii. grains. m. div. in pil. xxx. I have never experienced the least injurious effect from them; some nights, owing to severity of pains, I have taken 2 as a dose. I may truly say, I am never a day without Rheumatic pains, but some I don’t much care for now; although it is grievous, to stretch out one’s arm for a book on table (when sitting writing at Dicty.), and to find I can not lift it without severe pain; so teapot, &c, &c, at times. I am more inclined to dread Bronchitis, of which, and of late years and lately I have had several attacks. I am so very liable to take severe colds from draughts, but not from being in the “open”; almost always in Railway carriage, but never in buggy, gig, or on top of coach. (What a “yarn” about Lumbago!!)
	I notice what you have so kindly, so lovingly, said, re my again tackling this Maori Lexicon; but, unfortunately, you are not – can not be – aware of the real difficulties attendant on it. When I first undertook the job in 1886, it was difficult enough, (mainly, however, owing to the Maori language being composed of 8-10 sub-dialects; and not one of the resident Govt. Officers in those Districts caring to aid me – taking their cue from the supine Govt. of the day, – my opposition – political – foes!) – but now, – at my age, having from long disuse half-forgotten what I once well knew of Maori, and also memory failing! – and with loss of writing power of thumb & forefinger, so that I can neither write fast, nor long together, – I simply cannot do it. I have struggled hard during the last 3-4 months towards fulfilling my promise (extorted by the present Govt. from me), to get one part (say, 1/12th., or so of Maori: English) ready by Jany. next: and now the copying of it for press stares me in the face! However, for this first part I will not give in. Here, I cannot obtain skilled help in copying. I have often regretted I did not fall-in w. Prof. Max Müller’s views (kindly communicated by him to me), and allowed him to select and send out a studious young German as an Amanuensis – at a low rate of salary. Take a brief resume of my present usual daily labours, &c. – Breakfast, 7.30; Botany till 10: Dictionary till 1 (then plain simple dinner, never but one dish) – Dicty. again 1.30 till 4.30, or 5.0: then tea: 6-10, or 11, letter writing, Papers for Socys., &c. &c. – and as I do not visit, I have very few “callers”, and do not want them. ––
	I am now tired: all night up & at this: so I cannot now say a word w. reference to your latest valuable remarks on the very difficult Botany of Crypts., especially the smaller ones, and on my venturesome dabblings therein. In my last Botanl. Paper, wholly Crypts, (read here before Society last month, & forwarded to Dr Hector,) there are ½ doz. Gottscheas, nearly a dozen Hookerias, &c, &c., sp. nov. (?) Nay, don’t start! of one thing I am pretty certain, they are not to be found in Fl. N.Z. nor HandBook (later), nor your Fl. Tasm., – nor in any other Cryptogamic work known to me. –––
	Tempus revelat. Here, I must stop; my hand has long been weary; but before I do so I must heartily congratulate you & your sons on their exceeding well-doing and good beginning – may they Go on and prosper! But what of the young Botanist! on whom your mantle is to descend. –
	Believe me ever,
		My dear Hooker,
			Most sincerely yours,
				Wm. Colenso. 

P.S. You enq. kindly as to balance of little Draft: just let it stand as it is for the time. W.C. 
P.S. (2nd) I omitted to mention that the spn. of Gt. Barrier Island Alga you wished for (Perithaliæ sp.), I have somewhere, but not handy, I have ransacked everywhere I could think of but no! – in my despair I went over to our Museum (lumber room!) & there I found a bundle of sea-weed from the Barrier, I have taken out what I suppose to be the one you want: if it is not, let me know when you write. W.C. 

List of dried specimens Plants
put up for Sir J. D. Hooker. ––

In package No. 1. (sp. nov., described in “Trans. N.Z. Institute,” vol. XVI)
Viola perexigua
Metrosideros vesiculata
Panax microphylla
Tupeia undulata
Coprosma concinna
Nertera pusilla
Galium erythrocaulon
Craspedia viscosa
Gnaphalium parviflorum
Myosotis pygmæa
Utricularia subsimilis
Fagus apiculata
Corysanthes hypogæa
Dianella nigra
Astelia spicata
Cladium Gahnoides
Carex flagellifera
Danthonia pentaflora
Gleichenia littoralis
     (G. flabellata R. Br. var.)
Lindsæa trilobata
     (L. linearis Sw. var.)
Lomaria oligoneuron
     (L. membranacea Col. var.)
Polypodium rufo-barbatum
     (P. rugulosum Lab. var.)
Lycopodium consimilis
     (L. laterale R.Br.)

In package No. 1; but described in vol. XVII., “Trans. N.Z. Inst.”
Ranunculus amphitricha
Hoheria sexstylosa
Hydrocotyle concinna
H. –––––––– uniflora
Panax microphylla (flowers)
Loranthus polychroa
Alseuosmia pusilla
Olearia multibracteolata
Gnaphalium adhærens
Gnaphalium subrigidum
Gratiola glandulifera
Ourisia robusta
Fagus apiculata (fruit)
Microtis longifolia
Caladenia variegata
Thelymitra nemoralis
Thelymitra purpureo-fusca. 
Astelia microspermum
A. ––––– albicans
Juncus macrostigma
Uncinia nigra
Hymenophyllum tophocarpum
     (H. polyanthos Sw. var.)
Polypodium rupestre, var. sinuatum. 
					_____________

also, described, & read before Society, but not yet pubd., will be in Vol. XVIII. –
Hemitelia (Amphicosmia) stellulata, 
     (H. Smithii Hook. var.)
Botrychium biforme
     (B. ternatum with finely decompound leaves)
Coprosma heterophylla
C. –––––– rufescens. 
					______________

also, small Crypts in separate small packet (described in vol. XVI)
Symphogyna undulata. 
Symphogyna prolifera
Symphogyna fœtida. 
Symphogyna simplex. 
S. ––––––––– rubricaulis
S. ––––––––– longistipa. 
S. ––––––––– pellucida
S. ––––––––– vulgaris
Aneura filicina
     (Compare A. prehensilis Mitten)
A. –––– orbiculata (?)
A. –––– imbricata
Anthoceros muscoides
Fimbriaria gracilis
Sphærophoron polycarpum
					____________

Crypts. in small packet, Described, in vol. XVII: ditto
Bartramia Readeriana
Hookeria trichophora
Hookeria sciadophila
H. ––––– luteo-virens
Sphærophoron ?stereocauloides, Nyl. 
_____________

also, read before Society, and to be published in next vol. (XVIII) “Trans.”
Aneura crispa
Anthoceros membranaceus
–––––––––––––
N. B. Specimens of those marked  are also sent in spirits. (vid. Bottles)

In large package, No. 2, are sundries, mostly known, &c., but among them (in particular), are, ––
Panax longissimum (vera)
Loranthus punctatus, Col., to show how it runs along on a branch of Fagus. 
Pittosporum – which seems to possess other chars. 
Coprosma – a tall slender shrub, apparently distinct & sp. nov. 
Cyathodes – ochre-cold. flowers bearing large white depressed fruit. 
Leucopogon? fasciculatus. 
Clematis – finely cut leaves not yet found in flr. 
Metrosideros – sm. leaved) Do
Ditto large leaved)
A Rumex – 
A small autumnal Microtis. 
Earina alba, Col. (this should be placed at bottom of page 3.)
Sundry Grasses ––
Ditto not indigenous. 
A fine Brachycome (B. grandiflora, Col.) from Queensland: descript. also of this plant taken, &c. –
 &c. – &c. – &c. – . 
__________________

There are also some seeds of Areca sapida (old name) 2 vars. – of Cordyline australis, & of C. Sturmii: this last is a fine species, well worthy of extensive cultivation, its home being in the highlands’ interior, it should stand frosts well. 
The larger box contains Fungi only: –
The smaller Green box contains Hepaticæ. 
There are 3 bottles of spns. in spirits: – the 3rd is a very small one containing only a few flowers of Thelymitra formosa, Col. a fine & beautiful species, (but very scarce): see “Trans. N.Z. Inst.” vol. XVI. p.338. 
In the green box – will be found a long memo. of the Fungi – containing notes on colours, habitats, &c. 


Memo of Specimens in Spirits
________ 
Bottle, No. 1. 
Thelymitra purpureo-fusca. 
Corysanthes hypogæa. 
Microtis longifolia
Astelia microspermum: 
	branchlet m. 
	fruit (part of a branchlet)
Cross section stem Ourisia robusta, to show its angles. 

Of those marked  there are also dry spns. 


In Bottle, No. 2. 
Thelymitra nemoralis
Caladenia variegata. 
Corysanthes papillosa
Dendrobium Lessonii (to show its 4 calli)
Fruits of 	Alseuosmia, pusilla
 Panax longissima/vera,
Astelia fragrans – to show their peculiar thickened calyces
Small fronds of Anthoceros muscoides
1 spn,. peculiar honey-combed fungus (in another hand Morchella conica)

Of these marked  there are also dry spns. 


Memorandum of Fungi, collected by W. Colenso
in Hawkes Bay District, New Zealand, and
sent to Sir J. D. Hooker, Kew, London, June, 1885


(Obsn. I. of these specimens some are repeated, through having been gathered at different times & seasons of the year; others are in an incipient state, some are old, and not a few (I regret to say) were very scarce – sometimes only a single specimen! but in every instance I have done my best. 
II. The genera of some are known to me, and probably a few of the species, but I have, as a rule, abstained from giving either genera or species. 

III. The separate remarks upon them in the following List, as to colour, appearance, size, matrix, &c., were all made and noted down while fresh. 

–––––––––––––––––
 
b. 31. 	On trunks Fagus Solandri. 
	(Stereum lobatum Kze). 
b. 32. 	On living leaves of Earina autumnalis
	(Phyllachora sp. sterile). 
b. 33. 	On living leaf of Luzula; (only 1 small leaf accidentally found among specimens). 
(Trichobasis oblongata B). 
b. 34. 	On a dead leaf in forest – portion only. 
	(Hypoderma ilicinum DeNot). 
b. 35. 	From the centre of a tree – Elæocarpus dentatus, of large size (3ft.6in. diamr.), and lately felled, and apparently quite sound outside. 
(Mycelium of the Xylostroma kind). 
b. 36	On a dead log. 
	(Stereum lobatum Kze). 
b. 37. 	On living leaves of Metrosideros robusta. 
	(Sterile subiculum of some Sphæria). 
b. 38. 	On living leaf of a Hydrocotyle: only 1 leaf obtained! though sought for most diligently. 
(Cratereum minutum). 
b. 39. 	On dead logs Fagus Solandri: “Very handsome below, fresh and wet.” 
(Phlebia reflexa B). 
b. 40. 	On a dead log: curious, & only met with once. 
(Xylaria pallida Cke). 
b. 41. 	On trunks of trees, low wet wood. 
(Polyporus dichrous P). 
b. 42. 	On living Mosses, &c., blackish, very apparent, wet. 
(Phormidium or Chthonoblastes [Alga]). 
b. 43. 	Small Agaric, on dead log (partly eaten in drying). 
(Agaricus [leucospori] material insufficient). 
b. 44. 	On log, woods. 
(Polystictus pergamenus Fr junior). 
b. 45. 	Ditto, – only saw 3 spns. 
(Lenzites betulina Fr). 
b. 46. 	On back of a fallen tree. 
(Stereum acerinum Fr). 
b. 47. 	On roots of Polypodium rupestre, Lichens, &c., minute, yellow. 
(Lecidea sp allied to L. lutea		Lichen). 
b. 48. 	Growing together within a hollow rotten log. 
(Agaricus [Naucoria] aculus Cke		sp. nov.). 
b. 49. 	On dead Fagus Solandri. 
(Stereum vellereum B). 
b. 50. 	On bark, dead branches: small, orbicular, yellow. 
(Helotium lutescens Fr). 
b. 51. 	Small Agar. (perhaps others & larger). 
(Agaricus [Hammula] penetrans Fr). 
b. 52. 	On trees, woods. An Fungus? 
(not a fungus). 
b. 53. 	On rotten Veronica sticks; under; handsome, fresh. 
(Poria vaporaria Fr). 
b. 54. 	On rotten Veronica sticks (only 2 spn.) 
(Phlebia merismoides Fr). 
b. 55. 	On a dead log, – deep shaded woods. 
(Corticium læve Fr). 
b. 56. 	On back living trees, hanging in Yards. 
(Antennaria scoriadeæ B). 
b. 57. 	Stipitate, light yellow; low wet woods. 
(Helotium aureum Fr		var). 
b. 58. 	Agar., small, black – only 2 spns, – ditto. 
(Agaricus [impossible to determine]). 
b. 59. 	On rotten Veronica sticks. 
(Dacromyces chrysocomus Tul). 
b. 60. 	Agaric. – fine, elliptic, rich yellow-brown, all over one colour, rough with points, 4 specimens growing together on a log. 
(Agaricus [Flammula] sapineus Fr). 
b. 61. 	Under rotten Veronica sticks, – scarce. 
(Hydnum  mucidum Fr). 
b. 62. 	On stems of living Rubus, – scarce. 
(Nectria illudens B). 
b. 63. 	On rotten sticks, – small, orbicular, fulvous; wet wood. 
(Peziza [Moll] cinerea Batich). 
b. 64. 	Small, red, – on Hepaticæ, Mosses, & bark of trees; ditto. 
(Calloria venosa Fr ?). 
b. 65. 	On rotten Veronica, sticks. 
(Agaricus [Crepidosus] pezizoides Fr). 
b. 66. 	On denuded logs in the sun; gelatinous, fresh. 
(Exidia glandulosa Fr). 
b. 67. 	Under rotten Veronica sticks. 
(Polystictus versicolor Fr). 
b. 68. 	Small, on leaf of Microtis. 
(Uromyces  microlidis Che). 
b. 69. 	On living leaves of young shrubs (?2 species). 
(Galls). 
b. 70. 	Agar., – cracked on top; gregarious under logs. 
(Agaricus [Flammula] penetrans Fr [?]). 
b. 71. 	Agaric. 
(Agaricus [Naucoria] vervacti Fr). 
b. 72. 	 	(only 3 spns.)
(Agaricus [Pleurotus] serotinus Fr). 
b. 73. 		(only 2 spns.,) under rotten Veronica. 
(Polyporus lentus B). 
b. 74. 	On young living Panax arboreum; elegant, pure white, & striking, when fresh. 
(Corticium ochroleucum Fr var spumeum B&C). 
b. 75. 	Under rotten Veronica. 
(Stereum vellereum B). 
b. 76. 	From a fissure in bark of Veronica. black, sub-gelatinous. 
(Exidia glandulosa Fr). 
b. 77. 	Clear white and succulent, when fresh. 
(Calocera cornea Fr). 
b. 78. 	On Veronica bark. 
(Solenia anomola P). 
b. 79. 	On dead Fagus Solandri; brown with hairy top. 
(Hymenochœte rubiginosa Lev). 
b. 80. 	Curious & unique, on Hymenophyllum: 1 spn. only. 
(Cyphella filicola Cke). 
b. 81. 	On Cordyline australis bark; (this brought to me). 
(Sterile mucidine). 
b. 82. 	On bark living Alectryon excelsum: small, bright red. 
(Microcera coccophila Desing). 
b. 83. 	On Veronica (my only spn.)
(Favolus hispidulus B&C var). 
b. 84. 	Two small Lycoperdons – heath; hilly country. 
(Lycoperdon pusillum Fr). 
b. 85. 	Orange-brown; from logs, forest. 
(Dacrymyces deliquescens Fr). 
b. 86. 	On dead sticks, ditto. 
(Nectria episphæria Tode). 
b. 87. 	On rotten pendulous vegetation under Epipyhytes, hanging from trunks of big trees in places of perpetual calm! beautiful fresh and untouched!
(Chroolepus aureum Kutz). 
b. 88. 	On a rotten log, in a very deep dark gulley. 
(Agaricus [Naucoria] acutus Cooke	sp. nov.). 
b. 89. 	Small Agar. pure white & very fragile; logs, woods. 
(Agaricus [Mycena] lacteus Fr). 
b. 90. 	from cracks in denuded rotten logs. 
(Guepinia spathularia Fr). 
b. 91. 	Agar., from a burnt log; only 3 spns. 
(Agaricus [Flammula] penetrans Fr [? junior]). 
b. 92. 	On dead logs, wet woods. 
(Calocera furcata Fr). 
b. 93. 	On ditto: – “orbicular, flat, pearly, gelatinous.”
(Nœmatelia nucleate Fr 	spermatia). 
b. 94. 	On living bark of Hoheria sexstylosa: (vid. b. 101)
(Chroolepus aureum Kutz). 
b. 95. 	Under rotten Veronica sticks: Curious sp. 
(not found). 
b. 96. 	On wet rotten logs, underneath. 
(Strigose base of some species of Agaricus [Mycena]). 
b. 97. 	On heads of flowers of Olearia colorata (vid. 253). 
(Coleosporum compositarum Lev var olearia). 
b. 98. 	On dead leaf of Knightia excelsa, – minute, orbicular, sulphur-coloured; scarce. 
(Helotium phyllophilum Desm). 
b. 99. 	On bark of dead Fagus Solandri. 
(Stereum hirsutum Fr). 
b 100. 	On rotten log, wood: “delicate, white, ciliated.” 
(Helotium pseudociliatum Phil). 
b. 101. 	On bark living Hoheria sexstylosa (vid. b. 94: An F?)
(Chroolepus aureum K). 
b. 102. 	Under rotten Veronica sticks (curious). 
(Lasiosphæria ovina P). 
b. 103. 	On rootlets, base of Fern-tree, Cyathea dealbata, 
(Lecidea sp, allied to L. lutea		Lichen)
b. 104. 	On bark of living Panax arboretum. 
(Lecidea sp, allied to L. lutea		Lichen)
b. 105. 	Under rotten Veronica sticks. 
(Corticium viscosum Fr). 
b. 106. 	On sticks, wet woods: “small, white;” scarce. 
(Agaricus [Pleurotus] chroneus P). 
b. 107. 	Under rotten Veronica sticks: scarce. 
(Solenia anomola P). 
b. 108. 	From a deep dark gulley: (? an Fungus)
(Subiculum of Sphæria acanthostroma Mont [?]). 
b. 109.     Under rotten Veronica sticks: scarce. 
(Isidioid condition of some Lichen). 
b. 110. 		 ditto; “yellow-brown, hairy.”
(Mycelium of the Ozonium kind). 
b. 111. 	On bark living Coprosma: (?an Fungus). 
(Chroolepus aureum K). 
b. 112. 	On denuded logs, in the sun, – black surface, flat, adhering, gelatinous fresh, – of pretty large size. 
(Exidia glandulosa Fr). 
b. 113. 	Agar., small, in my field, Napier, among grass. 
(Agaricus [Naucoria] pedicedes Fr). 
b. 114. 	In clefts of firewood; garden, Napier. 
(Mycelium only). 
b. 115. 	On Moss, bark, base of Veronica. 
(Cratereum sp. 	imperfect). 
b. 116. 	On living leaves of Aristotelia racemosa. 
(Sphærella australiæ Cash	sp. nov.). 
b. 117. 	A white F., killing Mosses in the Napier forests. 
(White mycelium, no fruit). 
b. 118. 	On leaves of living Aristotelia racemosa. 
(Erysiphe densa B	conidia). 
b. 119. 	On bark of living Knightia excelsa. 
(Thelephora pedicellata Sch). 
b. 120. 	On rotten logs, woods. 
(Kneiffia seligera Fr	var). 
b. 121. 	On fronds of Asplenium. 
(Asterina [pelliculosa?] sterile). 
b. 122. 	Under rotten Veronica sticks, – “small Parmelia-like, whitish rim, dark within.”
(Peziza [Scutellinia] badioberbis B). 
b. 123. 	A peculiar looking dead-white, sub-cancellated gelatinous F., took long time to dry! (in its original bit of paper): very curious when fresh; from a deep dark gulley, with b. 88. 
(Treniella lutescens Fr v. alba B). 
b. 124. 	on rotten wood, wet forests. 
(Peziza [Scutellinia] badioberbis B). 
b. 125. 	Red Pezisa-like, among Mosses; ditto. 
(Peziza [Scutellinia] badioberbis B). 
b. 126. 	On dead wood – “curious hairy F. with black tip” scarce. 
(Posellinia [coniochæta] Colensoi Cke). 
b. 127. 	Under loose rotten bark. 
(Sphærobolus stellatus Tode). 
b. 128. 	Large pyriform F. gregarious among mosses on rotten log, shaded wood: only 1 small lot seen. 
(Lycoperdon pyriforme Fr). 
b. 129. 	On dead Rhipogonum scandens. 
(Diatrype glomeraria B). 
b. 130. 	Under rotten Veronica. 
(	––	). 
b. 131. 		Ditto (? 2 species). 
(Solenia anomola P). 
b. 132. 	On dead Rhipogonum scandens, (with b. 88.)
(Diatrype glomeraria B). 
b. 133. 	On living leaves of young Hoheria sexstylosa. 
(Meliola amphitrichia Fr)		). 
(Grandenia granulosa v candida B)	)	number repeated
b. 134. 	On logs, wet woods (scarce). 
(Polystictus labacinus Mont). 
b. 135. 	On charred logs, woods: “cream colour, margins fawn.”
(Polystictus versicolor Fr [junior]). 
b. 136. 	“in a hollow fissure under a charred log, fawn-colour, fresh: stained red, through being wrapped up wet, after rain, in red paper. 
(Poria fusco-purpurea Pers). 
b. 137. 	Among roots of Hookeria: dark orange. (?an F.)
(not a fungus). 
b. 138. 	Agar., small, on log, woods. 
(Agaricus [Omphalia] epichysium P). 
b. 139. 	On rotten branches: “white”. 
(Poria mucida P). 
b. 140. 	On living leaves of Weinmannia racemosa. 
(Asterina species [young & sterile]). 
b. 141. 	On peduncle of Panax: minute F. (Mucor). 
(Polyactis vulgaris Cke). 
b. 142. 	On Moss, under logs, woods; bright orange; curious. 
(Trichia varia P). 
b. 143. 	On living Rubus leaves; curious: gathered at different times, – Jany., March. 
(Hamaspora longissima). 
b. 144. 	On bark of a dead tree. 
(Batellaria lorulispora Phil	sp. nov.). 
b. 145. 	On Cardamine hirsuta, – covering the whole lot of plants, growing in large patches, & giving them a strange blue-mould appearance. 
(Erysiphe [Marchi?] conidia). 
b. 146. 	On rotten branches: woods. 
(Sphæronema Solanderi Cke). 
b. 147. 	On living leaves of Brachyglottis repanda. 
(Asterina reptans B&C imperfect). 
b. 148. 	On leaves of Panax arboretum. 
(Asterina bellata Berk). 
b. 149. 	On rotten branches, low wet woods (this stains paper of an orange colour). 
(Grandinia sp [perhaps new but insufficient for description]). 
b. 150. 	Under a rotten log; high woods: (curious sp.)
(Hydnum [res] tabacinum Cke	sp. nov.). 
b. 151. 	Under rotten log, wet woods. 
(Hymenochæte rubiginosa Lev). 
b. 152. 	 	Ditto. 
(Hydnum [Res,] membranaceum Bull). 
b. 153. 		Ditto, & partly underneath the bank. 
(Stereum ferrugineum Fr). 
b. 154. 	On living flowers of Carex: low wet woods. 
(Ustilago olivacea Tul). 
b. 155. 	On dead log: brown, wrinkled, thick, gelatinous, fresh. ″
(Exidia glandulosa Fr). 
b. 156. 	On rotten wood, – in low wet woods. 
(Poria ferruginosa Fr). 
b. 157. 	An elegant sp., sessile, hemispherical, dark coloured top cracked, ½ in. diamt., my own spn., in its original bit of paper, – on rotten wood. 
(Lycoperdon echinatum P). 
b. 158. 	Cut from a dead log; hymenium satiny, fresh, some spns. were larger. 
(resupinate state of some Fomes, perhaps F. hemisephrus). 
b. 159. 	On a dead log, filiform, curious: scarce. 
(Old Lamproderma, beyond recognition). 
b. 160. 	“Somewhat of a lead colour, slightly scaberulous in dots,” – from deep wood: scarce. 
(Kneiffia subtilis B&C). 
b. 161. 	On a dead branch: ditto,
(Rosellinia  mastoidea Sacc). 
b. 162. 	Under a rotten branch: ditto. 
(Mucidine indeterminable [washed]). 
b. 163. 	On living leaves of Hedycarya dentata: Fagus woods
(Asterina reptans B&C). 
b. 164. 	On logs, open woods. 
(Polystictus versicolor Fr). 
b. 165. 	On rotten logs, low wet woods:? 2 sps. (stained red from its red paper wrapper). 
(Poria vaporaria Fr). 
b. 166. 	On dead branches: woods. 
(Stereum acerinum Fr). 
b. 167. 	Under a log in dry bed of River. 
(Hypoxylon  multiforme Fr). 
b. 168. 	Running through old rotten logs, woods. 
(Xylostroma sp. 	incomplete fungus). 
b. 169. 	On a log, open wood, pretty, fresh: only 2 small spns. 
(Polystictus tabacinus M). 
b. 170. 	On a rotten log, low wood: “dark pink-red, curious, (and scarce).” 
(Arcyria punicea P). 
b. 171. 	On living Schefflera digitata: (?an F.) bis. 
(no fungus). 
b. 172. 	On dead Rhipogonum scandens. 
(Diatrype glomeriaria B). 
b. 173. 	In fissures of dead trunk of Fagus Solandri, a small spn. only, some being 1½ feet long, white fresh, excessively hard, tough, & difficult to remove. 
(Fomes [Lævi] hemisephrus B). 
b. 174. 	On a dead log: a curious flabby custard-pudding like substance, cream colour when fresh, adhesive but not gummy, exceedingly difficult to dry! (see b. 192.)
(Fuligo varians [Somm]). 
b. 175. 	On a rotten branch, low wet wood. 
(Poria ferruginosa Fr junior). 
b. 176. 	On a log, open wood. 
(Stereum illudens B). 
b. 177. 	On rotten branches: a handsome species, of a rich cinnamon colour & sub-opalescent, I send my only large spn. 
(Poria vincta [Berk]). 
b. 178. 	On rotten log; a handsome sp. of a rich dark brown, the hymenium lighter and satiny; a small stip. F. parasitical on 1 spn. Woods. 
(Polystictus tabacinus Mont). 
b. 179. 	on logs with preceding; peculiar peltate sp., with dark velvety hymenium. 
(Polystictus tabacinus Mont). 
b. 180. 	On under side of logs; a peculiar sp., black below, hoary white above; with preceding. 
(	)
b. 181. 	From under cover of my underground tank, Napier. 
(Poria mucida P). 
b. 182. 	On living leaves of Rhipoganum scandens. (all I have). 
(Asterina reptans B&C sterile). 
b. 183. 	Small stipitate sp., on dead sticks: woods: (scarce). 
(Immature Myxomycete). 
b. 184. 	“Minute, white, pubescent; none left, & this Eaten!
(cannot be determined		WP). 
b. 185. 	Under bark in large flakes, like old shammy leather. 
(Xylostroma ––– 	incomplete fungus). 
b. 186. 	On living leaves of Myoporum latum, Napier, in my garden, &c., – too common!
(Septoria Colensoi Cke). 
b. 187. 	On living Peach leaves: ditto. 
(Uromyces amygdale Pass). 
b. 188. 	On living “Blue Gum” (Eucalyptus) leaves: ditto. 
(sterile perhaps a Phoma). 
b. 189. 	On living leaves of Corynocarpus lævigata: ditto. 
(Imperfect fungus, indeterminable). 
b. 190. 	Under Horse dung, in my field: Ditto. 
(Mucor stercoreus Grev). 
b. 191. 	On denuded logs in sun; gelatinous, fresh, (?bis). 
(Exidia glandulosa Fr). 
b. 192. 	On rotten wood, old when obtained; similar to b. 174. 
(Fuligo varians [Somm]). 
b. 193. 	2 species on one support: 1, small reddish, glabrous; and 1, black & hairy; from Fagus woods. 
(Sphærosilbe [gracilipes Tul?]). 
b. 194. 	On bark: Fagus woods: (scarce). 
(animal production	WP). 
b. 195. 	On logs, open woods, – “a truly handsome sp.”
(Polystictus versicolor Fr). 
b. 196. 	Ditto: a handsome sp., – brown zoned above, light fawn colour margins, & whitish-cream below. 
(Polystictus versicolor Fr [junior]). 
b. 197. 	On living leaves Brachyglottis repanda. 
(Antennaria Robinsonii B&M). 
b. 198. 	On living Hypericum; small, yellow; in watercourses. 
(Æcidium hypericorum). 
b. 199. 	On living Plagiochila; small, black: woods. 
(sterile sphæria with Nostoc minutissimum). 
b. 200. 	On living Trichomanes venosum; minute, black. 
(Sphærella [Sphærulina] assurgeus Che	sp. nov.). 
b. 201. 	On living Metrosideros leaves; minute, brown. 
(no fruit	indeterminable). 
b. 202. 	On Moss bark dead tree; “small orange coloured.” (orbicular). 
(Nectria Olagensis Curr). 
b. 203. 	A peculiar substance (neither F. nor Lichen), a king of resin; found on split wood of fences, dry and hard. 
(possibly resin – 	no Fungus). 
b. 204. 	A peculiar substance (neither F. nor, L.), similar to b. 203, found exuding from logs. 
(–––––. 	no Fungus). 
b. 205. 	On ground, under dead branches; minute, scarce. 
(Mycelium). 
b. 206. 	Under bark of roots, wet woods; curious; scarce. 
(no fungus – some secretion). 
b. 207. 	″ 2 (?3) species, from low wet woods; 1, red peziza-like; 1, stipitate, sausage shape, violet-brown; and 1 white, scaly. –
(Peziza [Scutellinia] scutellata Fr). 
b. 208. 	On a dead log, deep forest; a novelty to me. 
(Fomes [Fom] australis Fr). 
b. 209. 		Ditto; ditto. 
(Polyporus [Mel] picipes Fr). 
b. 210. 	Agaric., gregarious, dark-golden yellow; under a log. 
(Agaricus [Flammula] penetrans Fr). 
b. 211. 	A fragment hacked off from a larger specimen – from the same plant, as No. b. 2, last lot. 
(Fomes [Fom] fomentarius Fr). 
b. 212. 	On logs, woods: 2 species; 1 roundish, white, parasitical (on the other). 
(not found). 
b. 213. 	On leaf of Knightia excelsa: only 1 leaf! 
(Dimerosporium excelsum Cke). 
b. 214. 	 	Ditto		Ditto. 
(Asterina reptans B&C styloporous condition). 
b. 215. 	On leaf of Weinmannia racemosa: ditto. 
(Sphærella Weinmanniæ Cke	sp. nov.). 
b. 216. 	On logs, open wood: Elegant, delicate, white out, wide, pink-brown below. 
(Polyporus dichrous Fr). 
b. 217. 		Ditto: – similar, but old. 
(Polyporus dichrous Fr). 
b. 218. 	On logs, with foregoing 2: excessively tender, untouchable! curious. 
(Stemonitis fusca Roth). 
b. 219. 	Agaric., gregarious, on logs; open woods. 
(Agaricus [Flammula] sapineus Fr). 
b. 220. 	On rotten logs, river bed: stipitate, light yellow: scarce. 
(Helotium pallescens Fr). 
b. 221. 	On dead trunk Fagus Solandri; a very peculiar species; with shining jet-black heads like little glass beads; untouchable!
(Comatricha typhoides.). 
b. 222α. 	On dry denuded hard logs, forming circular patches of 3-4 in. diamr. (open woods). 
b. 222β	 Ditto, much more stipitate & excessively fragile, of a chocolate colour, with loads of spores flying. 
(Stemonitis fusca Roth). 
b. 223. 	Similar, but brown, hanging from dry hard logs in another & close wood; disappearing in dust when touched! (with a sample of bronze-black beetle found burrowing in them.)
(Stemonitis ferruginea Ehr). 
b. 224. 	My only spn.! a fine one & half-destroyed by a similar kind of beetle, but brown: from a wet log. 
(Lycoperdon gemmatum Fr). 
b. 225. 	Ustilago-like, on utricle of Uncinia: only one chance-specimen!
(Ustilago unceolorum Ml). 
b. 226. 	Small F., only 3 spns., – open ground. 
(Stemonitis fusca Roth). 
b. 227. 	Agar., minute, filiform on leaf of Veronica; only 2 spns. found: 30 years ago I found upwards of 50 of this sp. on the edges of a leaf of Cordyline australis. 
(Marasmius androsaceus Fr). 
b. 228. 	Small? Agar., gregarious on dead trunk. Fagus Solandri. 
(Agaricus [Mycena] galericulatus Fr). 
b. 229. 	On dead sticks, dry hill; small yellow. 
(Hypocrea saccharina B&C). 
b. 230. 	“Small, delicate branched, ochraceous; woods, scarce”. 
(Ptychogaster sp. [incomplete fungus]). 
b. 231. 	“Minute, globular, smooth, rosey red, stipe white base reddish;” (ditto, ditto)
(Immature Myxomycete). 
b. 232. 	On dead Veronica bark, minute; my only spn. 
(Cratereum vulgare). 
b. 233. 	 	Ditto		(bis) scarce. 
(Helotium lutescens Hedw). 
b. 234. 	 	Ditto		– (scrap!)
(no fungus). 
b. 235. 	On Lichen (Pelligera), scrap! –
(no fruit – spermogonia or imperfect sphæria). 
b. 236. 	On dead Veronica sticks, underneath; (bis)
(Solenia anomola Pers). 
b. 237. 	 	Ditto		; scarce. 
(Lecidea sp	[Lichen]). 
b. 238. 	Among Mosses “filiform, delicate, white”, scarce. 
(Clavaria muscigena Kunst). 
b. 239	From cracks in a denuded log; small, stipitate, red. 
(Guepinia spathularia Fr). 
b. 240. 	Over running Mosses, on trees. 
(Chroolepus aureum Kutz). 
b. 241. 	On dead Fagus trunk:? young Polyporus. 
(Fomes [junior] perhaps australis). 
b. 242. 	Agaric. -like, dark coloured, stipe on one side, on trees; 2 tolerably large spns:, none left. 
(Agaricus [perhaps Pholiosa, heteroclitus Fr]). 
b. 243. 	Yellow-coloured, largish, thick stipe; on logs (bis?)
(Agaricus [Flammula] pisus Batsch). 
b. 244. 	On log in dark wood: Eaten before gathered. 
(Polystictus versicolor Fr). 
b. 245. 	Antennaria-like; black, large size: living trees. 
(Antennaria scoriadea B). 
b. 246. 		Ditto	similar; different locality. 
(Antennaria scoriadea B). 
b. 247. 		Ditto	ditto;		ditto. 
(Antennaria scoriadea B). 
b. 248. 	On leaves of Griselinia; dry hills. 
(structural, no fungus	diseased tissue). 
b. 249. 		Ditto
(structural, no fungus	diseased tissue). 
b. 250. 		Ditto (black, upper surface). 
(Asterina reptans B&C	sterile). 
b. 251. 	Minute, finely hairy, fascicled, brown, on Hepaticæ under glass. 
(Ozonium, or perhaps rhizoids). 
b. 252. 	On rotten branches, Fagus woods; (2 species). 
(Stereum frustulosum Fr with Nummularia exutans). 
b. 253. 	On Clematis indivisa; long gathered: same as b. 97. 
(Æcidium clematidis DC). 
b. 254. 	On ground, woods: light-brick-red, Peziza-like; hairy. 
(Peziza [Scutellinia] scutellata Fr). 
b. 255. 	On trunks of living trees; a pretty little delicate sp., fresh;
(Stereum vellereum B). 
b. 256. 	On living Leucopogon fasciculatus. (scarce: eaten.)
(Antennaria scoriadea B). 
b. 257. 	On bark. 
(Nectria Olagensis Curr). 
b. 258. 	On bark living trees:? an Fungus. 
(Corticium calceum Fr). 
b. 259. 	On Coprosma:? ditto. 
(Graphideous Lichen). 
b. 260. 	A delicate elegant zoned spn., fresh: none left. 
(Stereum lobatum Kze). 
b. 261. 	pure white, fresh, a small round lump; log: ditto. 
(Fomes australis Fr [junior]). 
b. 262. 	Cream-coloured; similar;		ditto. 
(Fomes [Lævi] hemisephrus B). 
b. 263,	Hypoxylon? concentricum	(all I have)
(Daldinia concentrica DeNot). 
b. 264. 	Sundry stip. ?Agaric-like. var. spns. 	(ditto
(Agaricus [Mycena] perhaps, polygrammus Fr). 
b. 265. 	Small brown stip. –			(ditto
(Polyporus [Mesopus] arcularis B). 
b. 266. 	Small bright-red, sessile, scarce, in woods, on ground, & always found eaten. 
(Berggrenia aurantica Cke var cyclospora). 
b. 267. 	Small? Lycoperdon, cream-coloured, fresh; cut into 2 halves for drying; from my field. 
(Lycoperdon colunellum BM). 
b. 268. 	Small? Bovista-like;		(ditto
(Lycoperdon cœlatum Fr junior). 
b. 269. 	Small white Agaric.,		(ditto
(Agaricus [Naucoria] pediades Fr). 
b. 270. 	Hirneola polytricha, of commerce. 
(Hirneola polytricha). 
b. 271. 	Polyporus – grows to a large size; 2 parcels (and? 2 spns.) – collected at different times, – always found (w. preceding, 270) on old dead trees. 
(Fomes [Læv] hemisephrus B). 
b. 272. 	A handsome pure white sp., when fresh; on dead logs, but though gregarious, not common: Polyporus nivicolor, Col., – “Trans. N.Z. Instn., vol XVI., p.361. 
(Polyporus nivicolor Col). 
b. 273. 	A similar sp., from a more distant forest; on wood. 
(Polyporus nivicolor Col). 
b. 274. 	A similar sp., thinner & cream-coloured; ditto,
(Polyporus nivicolor Col). 
b. 275. 	On leaves of Myoporum lætum: (bis). only 2 spns. 
(Septozia Colensoi Cke). 
b. 276. 	On bark; bright yellow, fresh. 
(	). 
b. 277. 	On bark Cordyline diffusa. 
(Hypoderma commune Fr). 
b. 278. 	Clavaria-like, my only spn., recd. in a letter. 
(Distorted Clavaria flava Fr). 
b. 279. 	On rotten wood, bark, &c., red. 
(Polyporus cinnabarinus Fr). 
b. 280. 	A very thin sp., – scrap, all I have; from a wet glen. 
(no fungus found). 
b. 281. 	A scrap (cancellated-like), on bark: all I have. 
(no fungus). 
b. 282. 	Small white, creeping over edges of scales of bark, (bis.) on living trees: all I have (?bis). 
(Stereum acerinum Fr). 
b. 283. 	Agaric, orbicular & pure white, fresh; my field, Napier. 
(Agaricus [Pholiota] præcox Fr). 
b. 284. 	On logs, woods; cream-colour, reddens on being touched. 
(Stereum sanguinolentum Fr). 
b. 285. 	On bark of rotten branches, below; forest. 
(Phlebia merismoides Fr). 
b. 286. 	Agaric., pretty species, circular, gibbous, dark brown/ 3 rows of spots around circumference margin incurved; flesh very firm; stipes rough: low wet wood: (my only spn.)
(Agaricus [Amau] vaginatus Fr? possibly without base). 
b. 287. 	On rotten wood, dry bed of river, in forest; yellow, stipitate, gregarious. 
(Helotium citrinum Batsch). 
b. 288. 	On living Fuchsia excorticata; whitish. 
(Corticium læve Fr). 
b. 289. 	On dead Fagus trunk, light-brown above, somewhat striped, margins darker; cream-coloured below; rather scarce, only 4 spns. 
(Polyporus [Pet.] petaloides Fr). 
b. 290. 	On rotten Fagus branches: dry hills. 
(Stereum vellereum B). 
b. 291. 	On dead stipes Lomaria procera; dark sides of river. 
(Phyllachora [?] sterile). 
b. 292. 	On a denuded log; hymenium w. a delicate bloom, when fresh: low wet woods. 
(Polyporus dichrous P). 
b. 293. 	On log; deep forest: only 2 spns. 
(Stereum lobatum Kze). 
b. 294. 	On leaves of Aristotelia racemosa. 
(Erysiphe densa B [conidia]). 
b. 295. 	On rotten sticks; ground, wet woods. 
(Odontia scopinella B). 
b. 296. 	On denuded rotten logs, underneath; – light reddish-brown, white edges, in large long patches, adhesive when fresh; rather handsome. 
(Polyporus dichrous P. resupinate). 
b. 297. 	On rotten sticks, ground, Fagus woods. 
(Stereum frustulosum Fr). 
b. 298. 	“Stipitate, gregarious, whitish, powdery, delicate”; ditto. 
(Verticilium Rexianum Sacc?). 
b. 299. 	On the rind of a living growing apple, in my garden. 
(Phoma malorum Berk). 
b. 300. 	Under scales of bark of living Dacrydium cupressinum forests. 
(Corticium ochroleucum Fr). 
b. 301. 	On a Fagus log; ditto. 
(Calocera viscosa Fr). 
b. 302. 	On living leaves of Panax arboretum, 2 species (ditto). 
(Asterina reptans B&C stylosporous condition). 
b. 303. 	On rotten twigs; light fawn colour; dry woods. 
(Stereum acerinum Fr). 
b. 304. 	On log; deeply concave, sub-cup-shaped, cream-colour, stipitate, toughish; dry woods. 
(Lentinus pygmæus Fr). 
b. 305. 	Under denuded log; wet woods. 
(Poria mollusca Fr). 
b. 306. 	On dry Fagus log; side of river; scarce. 
(Hypoxylon multiforme Fr). 
b. 307. 	From small fissures in preceding log: – small,?incipient big red Polyporus. 
(Polyporus cinnabarinus Fr junior). 
b. 308. 	Elegant, thin species; rotten logs. (Identical with No. b.       , only 1 spn., ante.)
(Stereum  lobatum Kze). 
b. 309. 	On rotten wood: globular, rough, spotted: peculiar, only 2 spns. 
(Lycoperdon sephrum BM). 
b. 310. 	On rotten log, deep woods. 
(Polystictus versicolor Fr). 
b. 311. 	Agar. gregarious on rotten Fagus branches; dark bright cinnamon; gills darker, rough on top. 
(Agaricus [Flammula] penetrans Fr). 
b. 312. 	On living Brachyglottis repanda leaves. 	
(Asterina reptans B&C). 
b. 313. 	Under rotten wood; circular, stipitate, light drab & all one colour; largest 2 lines diamr. 
(Helotium sordidum Phil	sp. nov.). 
b. 314. 	On a rotten log, river bed; forest. 
(Hypoxylon serpens Fr). 
b. 315. 	On dead branches of Fagus; black, spreading, very brittle; wood hard; on dry hills. 
(Nummularia exutans Cke). 
b. 316. 	On leaves of Earina; 
(Asterina sp?). 
b. 317	On logs; wood. 	
(Stereum hirsutum Fr). 
b. 318. 	On freshly burnt logs! very difficult to get good spns. 
(Monilia carbonacea Cke). 
b. 319. 	Agar., small, gregarious, stipitate, brown; top covered w. chaffy scales; stipe. rough; on rottn. logs. 
(Agaricus [Naucoria] erinaceus Fr). 
b. 320. 	A fine deep bowl-like thin Peziza, light-brown, my only spn. – split in drying. 
(Peziza sp. only part of a cup, insufficient). 
b. 321. 	(?) On living Dacrydium cupressinum. 
(exudation of resin). 
b. 322. 	From wet woods; small. 
(Coprinus plicatilis Fr). 
b. 323. 	On old hard wood, ditto. 
(Sphæria sp. exolete). 
b. 324. 	Under log, wet woods; stipitate, yellow, infundibuliform. 
(Chrysosplenium omnivirens B). 
b. 325. 	Agaric., delicate pink-red, on rotten branches. 
(Agaricus [Mycena] cornicola Fr). 
b. 326. 	On a log, among moss; 1 specimen only, bright red-claret, colour, powdery; curious. 
(Arcyria punicea P). 
b. 327. 	A fine blue-grey mould on dead Agaric., – on a Fagus log, river bed. 
(Penicillium glaucum Ck). 
b. 328. 	From cracks in bark of burnt rotting logs; forests. 
(Polyporus dichrous P). 
b. 329. 	On a rotten log, pendulous; dark mouse-coloured above, whitish-brown beneath., only 3 spns. 
(Agaricus [Pleurotus] atrocœruleus Batsch). 
b. 330. 	Agaric., small; from dead log, river bed. 
(Agaricus [Collybico] sp. [uncertain without details]). 
b. 331. 	Agaric., large handsome, circular, flattish but gibbous at centre, margin for ¾ in. deep regularly striped, rays dark and ribbed, centre brown; stipe thick, solid, ¾ in. diamr. at base! issuing from a large bifid volva; in wood, on ground: 2 spns. only seen, growing together. 
(Agaricus [Amanita] vaginalis Fr). 
b. 332. 	On rotten bark, & overrunning Mosses; white, fresh. 
(Hydnum mucidum Fr). 
b. 333. 	On living leaves of Rhipogonum scandens. 
(Galls). 
b. 334. 	On dead Fagus log. 
(Lenzites betulina Fr). 
b. 335. 	Under rotten wood; light ochrous, sticky. 
(Dacrymyces deliquescens Fr). 
b. 336. 	On dead Coprosma leaves. 
(Septoria Coprosmæ Cke spec. nov.). 
b. 337. 	On underside of rotten branches lying on the ground; white, delicate. 
(Mycelium). 
b. 338. 	On dead Fagus Solandri?young of Stereum lugubris, (Cooke.)
(Phlebia reflexa B). 
b. 339. 	Small Agaric., from dead log, deep woods. 
(Marasmius fœtidus Fr). 
b. 340. 	on back of rotten branches: light-fawn colour. 
(Hydnum mucidum Fr). 
b. 341. 	On leaves of Panax arboretum: woods. 
(Leptothyrium panacis Cke sp. nov.). 
b. 342. 	On edges (only) scales of bark; living trees: ditto. 
(Stereum acerinum Fr). 
b. 343. 	On dead leaves of Panax arboretum: ditto. 
(Asterina bullata Berk). 
b. 344. 	On rotten logs; hymenium fawn colour, slightly adhesive. 
(Polyporus dichrous P). 
b. 345. 	On rotten bark. 
(Hydnum farinaceum Fr). 
b. 346. 	Under dead Fagus Solandri, in dark hole in trunk; difficult to get at: pretty. 
(Stereum vellereum B). 
b. 347. 	On rotten branches, Fagus woods. 
(Stereum hirsutum Fr). 
b. 348. 	Among mosses on decaying trunks of trees; satiny, fresh, w. narrow margin below of a lighter colour: a handsome sp. only once seen but plentiful. 
(Polystictus tabacinus Mont). 
b. 349. 	On bark of living Dacrydm. cupressimum. 
(lichen). 
b. 350. 	Agaric., fine: top (pileus) elliptic, regular, 9½ in. long, thick, light-brown washed w. raw umber and darker at edges, edges slightly recurved; gills large broad, open, graceful, drab colour; stipe 7in. long, very stout and firm, 4in. circumf. at base, roughly & minutely pilose, (partly rubbed off in carrying nearly 2 miles in my hand), split in drying; no apparent velum: outside edges of forest, only one spn. 
(Agaricus [Colly] raphanipes v. glaucophyllus). 
b. 351. 	In a kind of brown layer on living Mosses, &c., very apparent when wet after rain; woods. 
(Phormidium or Chthonoblastes [Algæ]). 
b. 352. 		Ditto	ditto	black layer, 	ditto,		ditto. 
(Phormidium or Chthonoblastes [Algæ]). 
b. 353. 	Agar., small, dark raw-umber, felted on top of pileus; on dead Fagus; peculiar: only 2 spns. 
(Agaricus [Pluteus] umbrosus P. [?] insufficient). 
b. 354. 	Under rotten log (?bis). 
(Stereum sanguinolentum Fr). 
b. 355. 	Agar., dark, blackish, velvety; stipe, short, conical, with a thick base; fragile, tho’ thick; on rotten log. (only 1 spn.)
(Agaricus [Naucoria] without information). 
b. 356. 	Agar., tall, slender; woods: only 1 spn. 
(Agaricus [Colly] radicatus Fr). 
b. 357. 	Under rotten branch; dirty yellow; scarce, only once seen. 
(Sporotrichum geochrorum Desm). 
b. 358. 	Small, scarce; on old cow dung: woods. 
(Coprinus ephemerus Fr). 
b. 359. 	On rotten bark; small, gregarious, pink-red, stipitate: woods. 
(Agaricus [Mycena] corticola Fr). 
b. 360. 	Small Agar., light brown. 
(Agaricus [Naucoria] cerodes Fr). 
b. 361. 	Small stip., few (all I have!) 2 species?: Fagus log. 
(Agaricus indeterminable without details). 
b. 362. 	Among deep moss, Fagus log: Agar. 
(Agaricus [Collybia] xanthopus Fr vel. prox). 
b. 363. 	Ditto (w. preceding): elegant sp. 
(Polystictus versicolor Fr). 
b. 364. 	?Guepinia-like rotten log: woods: (? bis). 
(Calocera cornea Fr). 
b. 365. 	Growing w. Nos. b. 362, b. 363. 
(Phlebia reflexa B). 
b. 366. 	On living leaves of Olearia (?bis)
(no fungus on spots [perhaps early Phyllosticta]). 
b. 367. 	On moss (?bis). 
(Phormidium or Chthonoblastus [Algæ]). 
b. 368. 	Agar., fine, handsome sp., pileus – thick, glossy, sticky, gibbous, dark-yellow w. dark red-brown sub-quadrate scaly spots in concentric rings, w. dark centre at top, margin incurved, stipe roughish: 3 spns. growing together, among moss, w. Nos. b. 263, & 363. 
(Agaricus [Pholiata] adiposus Fr). 
b. 369. 	On dead Fagus Solandri trunks; grows very large but exceedingly difficult to sever: not common. 
(Fomes sp. [young specimens], larger and more matured should be sent; it is possibly new). 
b. 370. 	On ground, open lands: grows to a very large size, cream colour, fresh, & rough on top: formerly plentiful. 
(Lycoperdon cœlatum Fr). 
b. 371. 	On rotten logs, low wet woods, grows to a large size, only seen once, and then ?old, and very hard. 
(Fomes [Res] obliquus Fr). 
b. 372. 	On rotten branch: similar to preceding. 
(Poria ferruginosa Fr). 
b. 373. 	Agar., on rotten wood: a pretty sp. when fresh, brown margin darker & regularly crenulate; only 3 spns. found: nearly destroyed by larva in drying. 
(Agaricus [Pholiata] indeterminable, destroyed by insects). 
b. 374. 	On Fagus trunks: grows to a large size, hymenium whitish-fawn: only 2 spns. 
(Fomes australis Fr). 
b. 375. 	Ditto, and common: grows large, & very difficult to remove; hymenium beautifully white. 
(Fomes [Lævi] hemisephrus B). 
b. 376. 	Ditto, grows large, but not common; hymenium rich dark-brown, margined below: only 1 spn. 
(Fomes australis Fr). 
b. 377. 	A curious stip., fragile sp. – sent to me by post: – similar to b. 222, and b. 223: all I have. 
(Stemonitis ferruginea Ehr). 
b. 378. 	A fine blue hair-like plant, dark shaded holes, in the hills’ side; Napier. 
(Drilosiphon muscicola Kutz [Alga]). 
b. 379. 	On living leaves of Alectryon excelsum: 2 sp. 
(Melicola amphitridia Fr). 
b. 380. 	On rotten wood, with white centre above, margin red and ciliate, red below: forests. 
(Helotium pseudociliatum Phil sp. nov.). 
b. 381. 	A curious spreading sp., on the ground in patches 6 in. diamr. encircling pebbles, leaves, &c., snow white, and very delicate: in dry Fagus woods. 
(Botrytis terrestris). 
b. 382. 	A small stip. gregarious, umbilicate sp., stipe reddish, gills light-umber-brown: forests in shade. 
(Agaricus [Tubaria] inquilinus Fr). 
b. 383. 	On leaves of living Olearia colorata, dry forests. 
(Antennaria Robinsonii B&C). 
b. 384. 	On a denuded wet log: shaded woods. 
(Corticium calcium Fr). 
b. 385. 	White, adnate, on rotten wood: ditto. 
(Agaricus [Claud] variabilis Fr). 
b. 386. 	On rotten branch of a Coprosma tree: ditto. 
(Corticium læve Fr). 
b. 387. 	Sessile, under dead Fagus log, in open river bed (scarce). 
(Agaricus [Crepidotus] alveolus Fr vel. prox). 
b. 388. 	Stipitate, dark-brown and smooth above, largely convex; on log among Mosses; only 3 spns. 
(Agaricus [perhaps Mycena] uncertain). 
b. 389. 	On rotten wood: shaded wet forests. 
(Grandinia granulosa Fr). 
b. 390. 	On rotten log, in watercourse forest. 
(Stereum hirsutum Fr). 
b. 391. 	On rotten branches; shaded woods. 
(Hymenochæte rhabarbarina Cke & Br). 
b. 392. 		ditto		ditto
(Stereum vellereum B). 
b. 393. 	On rotten log; in watercourse, forest. 
(Bactridium  magnum Cke). 
b. 394. 	On tips of branchlets of living Moss, growing on trees. [I have formerly found much of this.]
(moss gemmæ). 
b. 395. 	On rotten branches; water course, forest. 
(Agaricus [Pleurotus] affixus B). 
b. 396. 	Small yellow, on very rotten wood: forest. 
(Chrysosplenum omnivirens B). 
b. 397. 	On rotten branch; wet wood. 
(Nectria Oligensis Curr). 
b. 398. 	Minute, stip., concave, Peziza-like, on young rotten leaf of Knightia excelsa; wet wood: only 2 spns. 
(Peziza [Hym] scutula P). 
b. 399. 	Stip., clavate, simple, (few 3-4 branched), white, yellow-brown tinted tips, & greenish base, on rotten log; wet woods. 
(Clavaria mucida Fr). 
b. 400. 	Ag. -like, stipe long, very convex, bright red above, gills brown; wet wood: (only 1 spn.)
(Secotium erythrocephalum Tul). 
b. 401. 	Pendulous on dead branch of a creeper, striking object, fresh: ditto. 
(Marasmius ramealis Fr). 
b. 402. 	On a dead branch; shaded wood. 
(Corticium læve Fr). 
b. 403. 	Peeping from cracks in charred logs, of a light ochre tint; Edges of forest: (few spns.)
(Calocera cornea Fr). 
b. 404. 	? On dead dry standing wood, in large patches, in a deep secluded forest. 
(Corticium cretaceum Fr). 
b. 405. 	On living leaves of Brachyglottis repanda: Ditto (?bis). 
(No fungus on spots [? Phyllosticta young]). 
b. 406. 	On rotten log: wet wood. 
(Agaricus [Mycena] too young to determine). 
b. 407. 	 	Ditto	Ditto. (few spns.)
(Geoglossum Berteroi Mont). 
b. 408. 	Ag., small, stip., gills sulphur-coloured: only 3 spns. (?bis). 
(Agaricus [Hypholoma] fascicularis Fr small specimen). 
b. 409. 	A striking sp. fresh, and quite new to me: – I send 2 spns. (both small, all I could save!) others were 3 times as large, slimy above, thick & leathery, rather old & filled with larvae, sub-gregarious, but only found by me on one wet log: forest. 
(Panus viscidulus B&Br ?). 
b. 410. 	A peculiar, thick, sub-gelatinous, convoluted brain-like dull white, sp. handsome when fresh, bursting from cracks in dark of an old Fagus log; much shrunk in drying: only 3 spns. Edge of forest. 
(Tremella lutescens P). 
b. 411. 	Ag. sub-gregarious, forming large rings own field, Napier. 
(Agaricus [Trich] brevipes Bull). 
b. 412. 	A minute sp., stip. agaric-like, snow-white, growing on cultivated Mosses indoors; only these 2 spns. 
(Agaricus [Mycena] capillaris Fr). 
b. 413. 	On trunks of standing living trees in still forests, forming large hemispherical clumps or posies, 2-3 feet diamr., but all parts having only this dead ragged loose appearance, adhering together intact, yet separating easily. –
(Mycelium, cannot be named). 
b. 414. 	?An sp. distinct., – sporangia large, circular, plane, white; growing among mosses on logs, entrance of wood. 
(Crucibulum vulgare Fr). 
b. 415. 	Large flat creeping fungus, under bark of trees: (see large spn. among Phænogams). 
(Rhizomorpha subcorticalis Fr). 
b. 416. 	On leaves of Pittosporum. 
(Punctures of an insect). 
b. 417. 	Peculiar white creeping fungus on leaves and stems of Capsella bursapastoris: from the outer coast. 
(Cystopes candidus Str). 
b. 418. 	On the rind of a Banana fruit, from Fiji. 
(no fungus, diseased tissue). 
b. 419. 	Peculiar honey-combed stipitate species: only 2 spns. obtained; one, and the larger, got crushed: in spirits, in bottle No. 2. (These were sent to me, & I don’t know if they had a volva.)
(did not come). 
b. 420. 	Red stip. fungus from the ground, in a garden a few miles S. of Napier, received last week. 
(Secotium erythrocephalum Tul). 
Numbers repeated
96. Peziza cinerea Batsch
133 Grandinia granulosa v candida
216 Sterile Asterina reptans B&C?
299 Hydnum farinaceum Fr
Without numbers
Polyporus cinnabarinus Fr
Fomes australis Fr
Fomes hemisephrus B
Hypomyces auranticus P? with 244
						W. Colenso
Napier, Oct. 7th/85. 
 # 


23 July 1886 (to WT Thistelton-Dyer)
Napier, New Zealand,
	July 23. 1886
My dear Sir,
Merely a few lines to go with a small box I have just finished putting up for you – by an extra direct mail leaving here tomorrow: – so I am obliged to pack & write in haste. –
A day or two back I unexpectedly received a good lot of a very rare Orchid – Bolbophyllum tuberculatum, mihi, – (described by me, from very scanty materials, in vol. xvi (1884) “Trans. N.Z. Institute”, p.336) and hearing of this extra mail I determined to send you some for your gardens – running all risks of losing it! (as formerly with others) but this may better stand voyage & confinement from its tuberous roots. With it I have also put up a few roots of the other smaller & long known species – B. pygmaeum): and hope to hear of their reaching you alive. 
There are also some seeds & fruits, – all briefly & hastily marked; – one, Coprosma autumnalis, mihi, is sp. nov. (just described by me), it is a large shrub or small tree, perhaps the largest; of this I have ftg. & fls. spns. for you – anon; another, Arthropodium reflexum mihi, sp. nov., is a little gem! – this is described (I have secured proof of it) in this years vol. (xviii) of “Trans. N.Z. Inst.,” – printed, but not yet issued to us. I hope your Mr Baker will be both pleased and satisfied with this: I have enclosed flowers & I have it growing. 
I duly received your kind notes, of Dec. 20/85, & Jany, 19/86, with list of spns. I had sent you; & also more recently, the plate of Colensoa – in a No. of Bot. Mag., for all which I thank you, at present, and will, ere long, write in detail: I should have written to you long ago, only I am waiting the issue of this year’s vol. of “Trans. N.Z. Inst.” – that I may the better refer to some plants, I have described & published therein, &c. – so you may expect to hear from me soon: besides, I have a lot of Bot. spns. for you. 
Please remember me most kindly to Sir J.D. Hooker, & tell him I have not yet heard anything from Engd, (may next week, per S.F. Mail, then due,) and, that I will write to him by next month’s S.F. Mail. 
Believe me,
		Yours sincerely
			Wm Colenso

P.S. The Bulbophylla – I hope to get to grow & produce flowers, &c., here on trees in my garden. W.C. 
I have, Sarcochilus, Earina, & Dendrobium, which have flowered. – Excuse haste, & errors! W.C. 
 # 


10 January 1887 (to WT Thistelton-Dyer)
Napier, N. Zealand,
Jany. 10th., 1887
My dear Sir,
	Three days ago I received (thro’ our Colonial Government) your kind note of Nov. 8/86. I thank you for it, tho’ the news by it was scarcely welcome, – viz. the weak state of the Bolbophylla, and the post-obit of the old-established Colensoa. However, I must say, that, apart from habit & inflorescence, it always seemed to me to be identical generically with Pratia. 
	Unfortunately your kindly sending me a newly produced & coloured plate with description of Colensoa last year (in a No. of Botanical Mag.,) had been the means of some ½ doz. Nos. of that work containing it being obtained from England: as the plant itself (though endemic) is unknown here. Indeed I never met with it, save in that one circumscribed locality where R. Cunningham originally found it, – viz. 34°N. 
	Of the state of the Orchids, &c., I had previously heard in an official note from your Mr Morris, written in September. I think I will try them (and other Orchids) once more, if I fall-in with them. Would the frozen Chamber (for mutton) answer? ––
	But all that would not cause me to write to you now, by this direct intermediate mail (not being our regular S.F. one), were it not that, in fulfillment of a promise to the late Director of Kew, I am sending him a frozen fat Lamb and so I have just thought that one to the present good Director might not be unacceptable in the early English spring: please accept the same from me. 
	I still owe you a letter! – this I hope yet to write and send (with spns. & seeds) when I return from the forests to which I am shortly bound. 
	Should you write to me again before you hear from me, please let me know what seeds (if any) or plants in these parts would be desiderata at Kew: I wish to do my best for my old love while I may. 
	With very kind regards,
		Yours very truly,
			Wm Colenso. 
I hope the “author’s copy” of my Botanl. papers, in “Trans. N.Z. Inst.,” vol. xviii, sent to you in August, duly reached you. 
 # 


14 July 1887 (to WT Thistelton-Dyer)
Napier, New Zealand. 
July 14th 1887. 
My dear Sir
	I duly received your kind note of March 12th., and recently your long list of seeds of N.Z. plants (desiderata at Kew) came to hand. 
	I was certainly struck with it (as you had surmised in your accompanying note); doubly so, I may say: – 1. as to their great number; and, 2. as to the utter impossibility of my being able to do anything for half, or more of the lot, such being alpine now under snow in regions never more to be visited by me! (at present looking supremely grand for 5-6000 ft. alt.) from my parlour window, (with the sun shining on them & blue sky all above & around, distance some 60 miles away!), while others of the seeds (plants) are denizens only of the S. Island and the smaller Antarctic islets. But I hope to do something – do what I can, anon. 
	I send you by this Mail a copy of my Papers in vol. xix of “Trans. N.Z. Instit.” – some portions may interest you: you will also find therein Dr Cooke’s Fungi, (which list you very kindly sent me,) – and a copy of the same for him, which I will thank you to forward. 
	I have a fresh lot of Fungi for you & Dr Cooke; also some dried plants and crypts for Kew; which I purpose sending by some early ship. –
	I am obliged to write briefly by this Mail. Please remember me most kindly to Sir J.D. Hooker when you see him: I also send him now a copy of my Papers and hope to write by next Mail. 
		I am, Dr Sir,
			Yours faithfully,
				Wm Colenso. 
 # 


4 March 1888
Dannevirke, (a village) in “70-mile 
Bush” – 100 miles from Napier)
March 4th 1888
The Director
Royal Bot. Gardens,
Kew,
My Dear Sir,
I have been here in these dense forests some time – Botanizing & enjoying myself in good health, though not so strong in my legs as I once was! and have a few seeds, &c., for you, which I hope to send from Napier per next Mail after this. 
	Finding again my elegant little Adiantum (A. polymorphum, Col.,) in another habitat, & this time w. remarkable Tuberous roots, I hasten to send you a lot of the roots herewith in a small regd. packet, hoping they may reach you in a living state, & that you may be able to raise them. 
	I have carefully dried them, & put up w. them a little of their own dry soil. Shortly I hope to send you some spares from fronds now drying. The spns. enclosed, show their usual normal state, size, &c., – but some few are larger w. 1-2 very short branchlets. I described it last year (w. other ferns) in a Paper read before our branch of the N.Z. Instit. It is an elegant little delicate tufted sp., & forms little beds in its rather dry shaded gravelly hab. – 
With very kind regards,
	I am, my Dear Sir,
		Yours faithy. 
			Wm. Colenso. 

(In another hand, presumably that of John Gilbert Baker)

I cannot separate this from A. diaphanum, Blume, a species that extends from China & Java to Fiji & Samoa. J.G.B. 
 # 


24 June 1888
Napier, N. Zealand,
June 24, 1888. 
W. T. Thiselton-Dyer, M.G. Etc. 
Director, Roy. Bot. Gardens,
Kew, London. 

My dear Sir,
	Two days ago I received your kind note of April 29th and have to thank you for it. I was, however, sorry to hear of the little Fern roots (tubers) having died on their passage, – but must try again. I also regret hearing of Mr. Baker’s opinion re my little pet fern: perhaps he may yet alter in this – as he did (though slowly) in not a few of my older ones; I am inclined to believe that he will do so, when you receive from me better spns. 
	By this mail I post to you an “author’s copy” of sundries of mine in “Trans. N.Z. Inst.”, vol. xx, for 1888: among other things therein several (!) ferns that I believe to be new – at least to N.Z. Botany. (which may amuse Mr. Baker. But one thing I think you will both credit me with, viz. my having diligently & closely examined all I have ventured to describe) among them a description of this little Adiantum polymorphum, in which I have pointed out its differential chars. from A. diaphanum Bl. And I will, with permission, trouble you, my dear Sir, with one request, viz. that you will kindly keep this “author’s copy handy by you, so that when you receive at Kew spns. of the plants described there, you (or your assistants) may be able to look them over w. my descriptions, as I generally point out their differential chars. from those of allied species, when such species are known to me. 
	I shall try hard to despatch my lot during July, but having a large number of Fungi & other small Crypts to look over &c., the putting-up will take some time, and I have plenty to do, this being our Society’s busy time. 
	In March I sent you some seed of new plants: I hope these may have reached you living, and may grow and turn out what I expected them to be. 
	If possible (our “Direct Mail” closing here tomorrow) I will send you a few more seeds, collected during this last (& subsequent) trip of mine to those woods. I left here early in April, & only returned on 2nd June – a long time absent! owing to so much wet; fortunately I had plenty of writing work with me, that kept me well employed. 
	I note w. pleasure what you say re the good prospects of Sir W. Jervois and Prof. Parker being elected Fellows of the Royal S., which I hope shortly to hear of being fulfilled. 
	Last week in my anniversary address here (as President of our branch of the N.Z.I.), I had to draw largely on Professor Stokes’ able anniversary address at the Royal Society re my dear old friend Sir Joseph Hooker. When printed I will send you a copy. –
	With very kind Regards,
		Believe me,
			Yours very truly,
				W. Colenso. 
 # 


4 March 1890
Napier, New Zealand,
March 4th., 1890. 
My dear old & highly esteemed Friend. 
At last! after a terribly long and constrained silence, I am about to write to you. It is a long time since my last, I know: and I can scarcely tell how to begin & compress into a letter a portion of what I should greatly like to say to you. 
First I will briefly mention why I am now writing, – because I have this day concluded my set task (begun in June/88!) of putting up spns for Kew. These will go by first steamer hence, and there is a good lot! viz. of Hepatacæ, from No. a.723 to a.1760: of Fungi from No. b.421 to b.1061: (of course, there must be some spns. 2ce. & 3ce. repeated – or even oftener – seeing they were collected in all 4 seasons, when their prima facie forms & colours alter so greatly:) – of phænogams & Ferns, 70, or more – nearly all of these last spns. are sps. novae, and as such described by me in Trans. N.Z. Inst. I trust, the Kew authorities will, in every case, study my descriptions of them, when going over the spns. Some of them, I hope, you may be pleased with. I assure you I have very often had you in mind in working them up, particularly in the little known peculiar and small Antarctic & Southern Genera, on which you laboured so fully: e.g. Melycitus, Drosera, Forstera, Oreostylidium (a new genus of Berggren’s), Selliera, Pernettya, Dracophyllum, Drapetes, Gaimardia, Oreobolus, &c. I have added 2 sps. of Pernettya to your single sp., and now – just to hand, I have a third sp., a very distinct & charming little fellow! in a complete state, both fl. & ft., from Mount Cook hermitage on the S. Alps, and with it some other wee Alpine novelties.
Second: I have been very busy indeed since date of my last; (which, I think, was to Lady Hooker, and written from Dannevirke in the Winter,) – and that, too, in both unexpected & new matters: of which, I think you will have known something from the papers & pamphlets I have from time to time sent you. – I had to rush back from “the Bush” (my spring visit) at end of October, to get out my little “Jubilee” brochure for the Govt. (long neglected by them!) and to work night and day at it, – or, rather, at the 2 Appendices I wished to have published with it, but declined by the Govt. on account of expense! And then our Bishop having been applied to by some of his clergy, and being himself inclined that way, most freely and kindly granted me his Licence to officiate as a Minister of the Ch. of Engd. without my asking it, which, I had often said, I would never do – in consequence of the harsh & illegal treatment I had received. And now, plenty of work has been found me in all our town & neighbouring Churches: the Bishop and Dean cordially inviting & appointing me to preach here in the Cathedral on Xmas Day – which I did to a crowded Congregation: but of these matters I must write to you more fully in my next; – which I also hope to do by next month’s outgoing Eng. Mail, from the Bush, whither I am going in a day or two, for there I shall have more spare time than formerly, as I don’t intend to ramble much (if at all) in the woods – my old knees having mutiny! I should have been in there long ago, but for this long & heavy job of putting up these spns. for Kew, – which I was determined in finishing before I started: and I have yet plenty more by me, especially of Mosses and Lichens – at present untouched. 
One semi-theological remark, I think I must e’en now mention, lest you should be led to suppose I had abandoned my liberal and “Broad Church” opinions and belief! Not so, however, the very contrary. Indeed, I may truly say, I am more than ever established in the correctness of them, and also in their expansion & increase, aided from various modern sources. E.g. in my first Sermon in the Cathedral on Xmas Day – (preached, not read,) taking for my text – “peace on earth, goodwill to man,” (part of the “Angels’ Song”,) after dwelling on the fitness and benefits of these for man, & shewing how such had ever been inculcated by all ancient Teachers & Philosophers – Egyptian, Chinese, Greek, Jew, Rom., &c., – Buddha, Brahma, Confucius, Antoninus, Cicero, Cato, Seneca, Socrates, Epictetus, Plutarch, Moses, Jesus, & Mahomet, – their truth & light, tho’ many coloured and many sided, being identically one, as issuing from the one fountain. In concluding I put it thus to them – the song. “Perhaps some one among you may be inclined to ask me, – “Mr. Colenso, do you really believe angels sang that song in the sky?” I reply: I know nothing about them: I merely read what is written; you may as well ask me about their size, features, hair, clothing (if any), &c. . –– their words – these words, are true, still wanting, still needed by man: in spite of the great & ever increasing armaments (which I briefly mention). Then I quoted Tennyson, ––
“There lives more faith in honest doubt,
“Believe me, than in half the Creeds.”  ––
and there not being any Div. Service in the other churches, &c., not only many from their Congregations were present, but also, some of their Ministers. – And so I made my debut w. my colours flying! The Dean, & others, thanked me for my sermon. All this I give roughly (in rush!) to you by way of sample. Of course, much talk followed. –
It has pleased me not a little, to find, that one of our newly arrived Clergymen (Rev. G.H. Preston, B.A. Oxford,) was a College chum of one of your sons. I have preached for him twice in his own Ch. (St. Andrew’s) at the Port – we have 3 Eng. Churches in Napier, – and am to do so, again, at his pressing request, on Sunday next, 9th. – he is about to leave Napier for Auckland, where he has just been nominated to a far better living. I am very friendly with him, and his good wife – though he is very High Ch.! –
By the way, I have a curious question to ask you: –– All our Clerics (somehow!) wear “hoods” (of all sorts), though several of them are educated & ordained here in N.Z., – never saw a niversity nor gained any U. degrees. I am told by the Dean (who is also a warm & good friend of mine) such is the rule – of late years, –  and, of course, as they profess to have belonged to different regiments, they all differ. Now, the Dean said to me, in dressing up in the vestry, seeing me without a hood, – that he thought the Royal S. Fellows wore a distinctive one, and therefore, I ought to have one; – Is such the case? I was early  led to expect a Lambeth degree, and even received my gown from London, in ’44, in readiness: but such hopes failed. 
I will only add, – that I am on the best of terms with the Bishop, and am a most welcome visitor at his house. When his 2 maiden sisters arrived from Edinburgh, just before Xmas, he specially came here (some rough & hilly distance) to invite me to tea & spend the evening w. them: – and all this ngreat change through his perusal of my manifold documentary evidence (not of my writing) of 40-45 years back. – Of this I had also given you hints a long time ago. –– And nearly all the Clergy here in these parts are particularly kind (always excepting the one ever antagonistic clan): indeed, the younger ones almost treat me as a kind of Nestor in their (our?) camp. I have more invitations to preach in their respective churches than I can meet – and in those I have good reasons for believing their Congregations join. ––
I trust Lady Hooker yourself and family are all quite well, and that this severe and unsparing Influenza-scourge has not visited Sunningdale. I am keeping well – chronic Rheumatism daily of course! but generally bearable, though not liked, sans complaining – “What can’t be cured must be endured.” Of late it is usually worse when I get up in the mornings, so that it makes me to totter, &c., – but, breakfast over (viii) I get relieved: however, I have to be very careful, and I am so!  Have been a little tried sometimes in Church Services: so much of long standing, and then the trips to and fro, – so many steps! up & down, in & out of Chancel – to Desk, Lecturn, Pulpit, &c., –– always make me very weary, but hitherto I have got on (in that respect) very well – far better than I could have expected. ––
Here I must close. Please make my best respects to kind Lady Hooker: and with kindest & affectionate regards to yourself ––
I am, my very dear & old friend,
		Yours always
			Wm. Colenso
4 March 1890 
Napier, N. Zealand,
	March 4, 1890. 
W. T. Thiselton-Dyer, CMG. 
&c. &c. &c. 
Kew
My Dear Sir, 
	At last! I have completed the putting-up the lot of plants for Kew so long & so often promised: and I assure you I am heartily glad, for I have been getting tired over this long job, mainly owing to want of time. 
	As I am about leaving for “the Bush” (interior forests), I shall send to our port – to my agents there – 2 cases to be shipped to your address per first steamer hence to England, and I trust they may safely and quickly reach you: – my agents will duly apprise you of it. 
	The contents must speak for themselves. I may just say – there are several hundred specimens, mostly the smaller Crypts. Hepaticæ and Fungi, with a few Ferns, – and a fair lot of Phænogams; – these last together with the Ferns have been described by me in the “Transactions N.Z. Institute”, also several of the Hepaticæ. All are numbered, and all that I have described are also ticketed, bearing the vol. of “Trans” in which they are published. I shall hope to receive a good recount of them by-and-by from you – especially of the Fungi (as before from Dr. Cooke), and of the Hepaticæ not examined; no doubt you will find many lots repeated (perhaps 3-4 times): also, others (Hep.) containing in their tangled masses as gathered several distinct sp. & perhaps. gen. 
	One request I have to make that in the examining of my named and published sps. nov., those who may do so will study their descriptions as published: for I have also frequently noticed their differential characters from those of allied species. 
	I much regret my having only received a very few spns. of some of the greater novelties from the mountainous interior – collected quickly and roughly by others; indeed, several of these I had to hunt diligently after as the plants were brought to me imbedded in mud or volcanic pumice dust, or dried together in hard sods as they were hastily cut out of the ground, & never properly preserved or looked after!
	I hope to hear that some of them (at least) will particularly please Sir Joseph Hooker as well as yourself. Should you wish for any more specimens of these now sent (and I have them) be sure to let me know – the described ones by their names: the others by their numbers. 
	A rich harvest, no doubt, awaits the patient skilled Botanical collector in the higher regions of this Country – would that I could visit and work those spots myself! ––
	I have still a few described plants (particularly mosses) not now sent, for I cannot lay my hands upon them – having them scattered in dozens of unassorted & large bundles! – also, a large lot of undescribed ones to go over, mostly mosses & Lichens, and some monocotyledons – chiefly Cyperaceæ. If possible during this coming winter I hope to look out a lot for you, as I shall have a little more time now, for this kind of work, seeing I must, of necessity! give up going into the rough and distant woods. 
	I am, my dear Sir,
		Yours faithfully,
			Wm Colenso. 
 # 


13 September 1890 

Napier, N. Zealand,		
Sepr. 13th, 1890
My very dear and staunch old friend,
How shall I write a proper letter to you? Yesterday (12th) the sight of your well-known hand writing and newly arrived letter from you acted like a semi-electric shock! and both surprised & delighted me. But alas! Conscience would not allow my delight to continue undisturbed, unclouded – for I well remembered my old promise, too often broken, yet never forgotten, and always re-appearing like a troublesome ghost, all the stronger for having been put off from time to time & never laid! It seemed, too, something like a curious coincidence, for I was about preparing to write to you by this very mail, having finished on 31st ultm. the heavy Ch. work that had (since my last) been my main hindrance. And when I wrote my last to you in March, I said, I had only then just completed the job of specimens of plants I had had so long in hand for Kew. Right glad, however, am I to find you still alive and working w. a will! & well in health: also, Lady Hooker, and all your family: good cheering news this!
But I must first tell you a little about myself; re matters since my last of March 4th. 
On 13th of that month I went off to the forests, there (intending to spend 1 month in the early autumn, and return. After being there (Dannevirke) for a fortnight, our Bishop suddenly appeared, without any note or herald apprising of his coming, and I soon found that he had come so far inland on his way to Woodville (20 miles further S.) to remove the resident minister of that place to Port Napier Church after Easter Sy. (Apl. 6,) &, not having anyone to supply his place at Woodville, to induce me to occupy the same – pro tem. At first I was disinclined, but seeing the necessity agreed to do so for 4 Sundays, or, at furthest, until the end of May. Woodville lying very low and hemmed in at base of mountains, cold, wet, and very foggy. Then my friend at Dannevirke, Rev. Robertshawe, put in afresh his claim for a month’s holiday (after 4 years vegetating in the Bush!) and he got it allowed, and then it followed that I was also to serve Dannevirke (Woodville cum Dannevirke) though 20 miles distant, and to take each place on the alternate Sunday, (Rev. Mr. Webb, of Ormondville, 12 miles further N. from Dannevirke, also assisting on the alternate Sy. at Woodville,) and thus I was suddenly let in for constant unexpected Ch. work! and as the Bp. failed to get a Cl. to supply Woodville, (mainly owing to the starvation salary, £130, or so) I kept on till the end of June: much tried, as you may readily suppose, with chronic Rheumatism continued & daily, & generally worse at night in bed. However, early in July I returned to Napier, to warmer & drier quarters, to look after my own priv. matters so long neglected; during this wet month the Bp. went purposely to Woodville one Sunday, and the Dean on another, alternately w. Mr. Webb. I should mention that early in June, the Bp. had received a promise from Rev. M. Long of Auckland that he would come to Woodville in July; this, however, he did not do, and in July (14th) he again wrote to the Bp., saying his work at Auckland would terminate in 4 weeks, and he would leave on 14th. Aug. for Napier. – Well: at end of July the Bp. again looked to me to help; and so I started off afresh on 1st. August for Woodville, and as Robertshawe had returned to his own parish (Dannevirke), and Webb has 4 (!) scattered villages to attend to, & hold it in – I agreed to do the whole duty at Woodv. until Long should arrive, supposing such would be about mid-August. However August had nearly expired, and then the Bp. heard from Long – he was not coming at all! I did duty there until 1st instant, when I left for Dannevirke, & arrived here (in terrible stormy weather!) on the 4th inst. In conclusion: the Bp. went to Woodville on the 4th. inst., taking a young Layman with him, (student cand. for Orders, very recently arrived in N.Z.,) placing him there as Lay Reader. Now, all this long yarn, my dear friend, is to let you know how it has been w. me since my last to you. At first, my old work seemed somewhat strange after 37 years of disuse, increased through having to do w. different & strange Congregations (who, no doubt, had been used to High Ch. ways!) but, latterly, all that had vanished, and I assure you – I have parted with my dear Woodville Congrs. w. very great regret, which I believe is mutual, at all events, they grew wonderfully in numbers, and as to their rapt attention throughout, (& my Discourses are particularly long!) it was astonishing! Væ mihi! I deeply feel the change; it haunts me, indeed, I fear I cannot well stand it. –– However, I am going in there again next week, this time to obtain good spns. of some of our early spring flowers (notably Coprosma), and have never yet been in those woods in Septr.-Octr. And also, to give a Lecture in the Town Hall at Woodville, “in aid of the Scotch Presbytn. Ch.”, on 4th. inst. Mentioning this, will serve to show to you, that your old friend is not narrow minded: no doubt I shall displease some of our High Ch. folk, but I expect I have done that already! and they know I do not care a rap for any of their extras, however venerable their appearance from hoar antiquity. I, a seeker after Truth in every place & form, and moreover finding her, more or less, everywhere, cannot, & must not, take up with any precious forms or guises. As I told my Congns. in a late Sermon on the Fatherhood of God and the Brotherhood of Man (quoting Pope preferentially),
“Father of all in every age
    In every clime adored
By Saint, by savage and by sage,
    Jehovah, Jove, or Lord.” –
But I must stop this. 
During the past 4-5 months, I have done very little in Botany, partly owing to the deep forest being cold & wet, so that on entering them – especially if from the sun, or warm in previous exertion, – a sharper onset of Rheumc. pains ensues! Still, I have obtained a few, among them a pretty little & very distinct Caltha, and several peculiar Fungi: also, some from the high S. Alps, 6,000 alt., Celmisias, Raoulias, &c., and among them 1 or 2 peculiar and wholly unknown to me. I enclose spns. of 2 of them in a small box, and if you can early let me know the Genus of No.1, – or find time to describe it, I will thank you. I saw it when fresh, and it was highly curious. I am pleased to find you mention my last large & heterogeneous lot having been safely received at Kew, & were being overhauled. Only a week or two after I had dispatched that lot, a note came to hand at Dannevirke from Kew from Mr. C.B. Clarke, (dated July,22,) re Gahnia informing me, “that of the 4 new sps. of G. I had described, there was no authentic spn. of any one”.(!!) This astonished me for I had carefully set aside spns. for you, and if I have them still (and I believe I must possess them) they shall be sent ere long. May I trouble you to let Mr. Clarke know this? I can only suppose, that such were omitted (forgotten) at the time of packing up, through their extra lengths, & being in separate papers. 
Re your new work: or, shall I rather say, your heavy work now about to be hatched after so long an incubation, Darwin’s “Index Plantarum.” (You never before told me of this.) I had always thought that yr. “Flora Indica” was your present opus magnum, & completely filled your hands head & time. All your old friend can (at present) say, is, “Go and prosper.” No doubt it will prove an extremely useful work to future Botanists: (may they duly thank both you & Darwin when using it!) But I suppose I shall never use it, nor even see it. I fear, I cannot well help, monetarily, just now. I have been pretty well drained of late, so many unexpected applications, not only here in N.Z., but from abroad – some from R.S. and L.S., – but should (say) £20. be of real service, really needed, it shall be forthcoming on requisition, for your & Darwin’s sake. I not infrequently allude to, & quote from, him, in my sermons. I may tell you, that during last 2 years I am a heavy loser – through Insolvents, unpaid Rents, state of Bk. of N. Zealand, and increasing taxation!!!– Here I may add – in serving Dvk. & Wdv., I pay my own expenses – travelling & hotel (this latter at 10/- per diem exclusive of extras!) – people in Bush very poor. My exps. at W. were offered me – I refused. 
I am much pleased at your liking that portrait sent w. “Typo.” Everyone, somehow, says the same, and the applications for that “Typo” No. have been numerous from all parts, – Home & abroad! From letters to hand, of late, I believe it to be reproduced as enlarged memoir – probably from “Bibliothecæ Cornubiensis” – (not however from me) in several works publishing in different parts of the world. It took me wholly by surprise, for had I known of Harding moving in the matter, he should have had an amended Memoir. But, on the other hand, you greatly surprise me, in saying – “I am glad to have something better of you, than the little old photo that never gave me satisfaction”. Surely you forget the large one (Cartoon) I sent you a few years ago, & you warmly welcomed it! Of these 2 I prefer that Cartoon. You also mention the photos of Interior of Cathedral. Yes, I sent them. But what of the little pamphlets? – as “Tide Lore”: “Jubilee Paper – N.Z. 50 years ago.” “The Signing of the Treaty of Waitangi,” &c.? I hope these all reached you – and, more recently, my further copy of Botanl. papers in Vol. xxii. “Trans. N.Z. Instit.” I mention them, thinking that you, in your constant receipt of such small pubs. from all parts of the world, may not have noticed them. 
Of course you are aware of the big meeting of savants under auspices of the “Australian Scientific Association” (of which I am a member), at X.Ch. Canterbury in Jany. 91. Hutton, as Hon. Secy, wrote to me, saying, I had been cast as “V.P. Biologl. Section,” – would I accept it? I replied NO. They had even put in such men as Dr. Hocken of Dunedin, and C. Tregear of Wellgn., as “V.P’s. Ethnological (Maori) Section”! (where I might be of some service,) – and also Cheeseman & Kirk as “V.P’s. Botanical Section”: and as I shall neither be there nor contribute a Paper, (which they also, now, know,) I am out of the running. ––
I am very sorry for Buller – all his Library & many other good things are gone to Davey Jones’ Locker! B. had shipped them on the barque “Assaye” (lately posted at Lloyds) and there is no longer any hope! ––
Here we are brimful of “Strikes”, now about 3 weeks old, ruining everything, paralysing all work! Steamers & sailing vessels laid up; Railway trains only running ½ time, & scarcely that for 3 days of the week, nor at all from want of coal, mail delayed and slowed, mines, manufactories, (word obscured) and Companies stopped working! thousands, nay myriads, idle, having left work on “strike”! Prospect is very serious. Noone knows what may yet happen but the general strike cannot hold out very long from want of the news of war. Still – the damage & misery will be enormous. I am keeping well in health; feeling (as might be reasonably expected) a little more the stealthy advances of age, but this constant Rheumatism annoys me; it is now & has been for 4-5 months obstinately fixed in right shoulder where it joins the collarbone and generally worse at night; sometimes I cannot put on my coat, &c. But after all said, I am a kind of living wonder at my age keeping all my faculties. Everybody says so. ––– I am, as you may suppose, on very good terms with the Bp., who wants me frequently when I am in town, & writes often to me in the Bush, & always very affecty. And now, Good bye. 
With kindest regards to Lady Hooker & to yourself. 
Ever, my dearest old friend, Affectionately yours,
W. Colenso

P.S. I hope you may not be tired with my long & prosy letter. 
 # 


12 July 1891 
Napier, N.Zealand,
July 12th. 1891
My very dear old friend –
	I cannot tell you how very much I have been having you in my mind of late – & this from several causes. But (in media res) my main reason for writing you by this month’s mail, now leaving us, is to hasten to send you the enclosed Draft for £50, which I am just now enabled to do, to help towards the sum you required (as per your last) for the publishing of your & Darwin’s “Index Plantarum”, and, If you may have been lucky enough to have made up that sum – then use this for your bairnies – or as you please.
	And here I should briefly tell you re this £50. Several years ago (in ’75), I think,) I parted with my last bit of Farmland (then part Totara bush) to 3 brothers – stalwart Irish Protestants; well, for several years they worked hard & zealously, & so managed to pay up, as arranged; but for the last 3¼ years nil – w. an increasingly poor prospect for me! however I bore it, & encouraged them, waiting patiently (no rent even for those 3¼ years!) In the autumn (March) their station was burnt up, – fine dwg. ho., pride of the Bush! & now they thought it best to sell (if possible) and separate – one of them already being in Australia a gold-mining! I consenting, in April last the place was sold by Auction at a fair price – doubly good for them, who would have the greater benefit: then I saw I could aid you a little; but after repeated cablegrams to Australia to absent brothers and no replies, it was determined that the oldest here should go thither & hunt him up – if above ground – as their conveyance could not be legally executed without his signature; so away he went on 9th May, – he was to be back in (say) 3 weeks. Time rolled by, no tidings & we began to fear the worst. – when suddenly, yesterday (11th) he arrived here by steamer, & came to see me relating his long & adventurous toil in quest of his brother, whom he at last found beyond the Blue Mountains! They squared w. me directly, and so tomorrow I shall get what I want for you from Banker. And this sum should be double what it is, only by this same Mail I have to send £100. to my eldest son (a donation, unexpected, to get him out of difficulties,) besides his annual allowance from me. –
I have said, I have been often thinking on you – & I may add, painfully so because I have not had any acknowledgement of my last to you (in Sept/90): and I much feared I had vexed you, somehow, with it – (for I had particularly desired to have a few lines from you early re a small alpine plant I had sent you with that letter) – or, that it had never reached you.
	But this mg. I have again been reading your long letter (the last too!) of July 15th (just 12 months to a day,) – and it is so overflowing w. kindness & geniality that I must endeavour to cast to the winds all my evil thoughts of you – for such (on your part) is wholly against your nature.
	I cannot write now anything Botanical: will merely add – that Kirk is likely to have the editing of a 2nd. Ed. of your “Hand Bk. N.Z. Flora”. (I could wish it were in better hands from the Old Countries – at all events the supervision, – to be aided by him & other of our local Botanists). K. has written to me 2-4 times about it, asking for help, spns. sps. nov., &c., &c. And I have promised to assist, and 2 days ago I sent him 60-70 spns. of plants described by me in “Trans. N.Z. Instit.” – to be followed, ere long, with another such lot.
	I have also a few new plants from interior, my own finding: some being descd. in this forthcoming vol. of the “Trans.” now about ready (so Hector has lately informed me), and, among the more recent ones, 2 Ferns, – 1. a Hemitelia (not very near to your H. Smithia) and 1, a Polypodium – a fine giant fellow standing 6-7 feet high, growing thickly together like our common Pteris, & difficult to work through: I have a whole spn. of it for Kew.
	I suppose you duly heard, in Feby. last, of the great meeting of Scientists at Xt.Ch. N.Z., and how very kindly Sir J. Hector (President) spoke of me in his Opening Address: & that, too, before the Governor (Ld. Onslow) and all the Assembly. 
	I have been much engaged of late in many ways: on some Sundays having 2 whole services in various churches in the country townships, & always having good Congregations: on the whole I am still keeping very well, with chron. Rheumatism, of course, always handy alongside and too often coming on board!
	I notice in the concluding par. of your last (12 months old), you say: “Herkomer has made a very successful portrait of me for the Linn., of which a copy in a new photo. after permanent process, of large size & excellent, shall go to you in due time”, but nothing to hand to date.
	I must close. Trust Lady Hooker, Yourself & family are all quite well – escaping blizzards & influenza in your Tusculum at Sunningdale; and with best regards to Lady Hooker, & same & everything good for yourself as of yore.
	Believe me Ever, my dear old friend,
		Yours very affecty.,
			W. Colenso.

P.S. 14th. I send copies “Author’s Papers” (Vol. XXIII “Trans.) just to hand.

 # 


6 January 1892 
Napier, N. Zealand
	January 6/92
My very dear & valued old friend,
	“Dicite Iö Paean”!  – your grand portrait has been this day taken out of its mummy-case and hung up here in my room, and 20 times have I been contemplating it, (yea, talking to it!) comparing it with what my over tenacious memory remembers of you, when young and in these seas (in 1842) 50 years ago! – and, also, with what I call your intermediate portrait so neatly engraved by Jeens: – and now I am rich! and I thank you, my dear friend, from the bottom of my heart, for this last and great addition!
	Before, however, that I write any more, (remembering the season,) I must heartily wish you and Lady Hooker and all yours – a Happy New Year! may this one of 92 prove to be the very best in every respect you have ever known. 
	Your long & affect. letter of Augt. 22nd reached me early in October – at a time when I was doubly busy in helping 2 sick Ministers in their 2 churches, 40 miles apart: one of them, Mr Parkinson, took to his bed in October & died shortly before Xmas. I have read & re-read your valued letter, but always with some amount of dissatisfaction w. myself (amounting to upbraiding), at my having caused you to write such a long letter in the midst of your onerous labours. A further teste of the same I have in the corrected proof-sheet of “Index Kew. Plant. Phænogm.” enclosed in it! If you, or the compiler, cause your printers such a heavy amount of extra labour (always disagreeable to them), – such must terribly increase the cost of getting out that work. 
	The case w. the picture arrived at the Port on the 4th Nov. (2 days before I was seized by “La Grippe,”) – the “Customs”, in their zeal, detained it some time for examination & duties, and it was some time before it reached me here. 
	I have had you very much in my mind of late – during my long illness. I was attacked by this horrid epidemic, Influenza – on Nov. 6th. I managed pretty well at first (on Sunday 8th) and was getting round nicely, when heavy Ch. duties on the 15th., (a most inclement day w. strong gale from the S. and very cold, & having to walk long distances over exposed ground,) caused a severe relapse! – which the Ch. duties on the 22nd. served to clinch! – I ought not to have gone out of my room on that day, in which I had been confined all that wk., but it was the last Sunday of our Ch. (Eccl.) year, and I had warned my Congn. of it on the previous Sy., & desired to see a full attendance; besides, I was to give them their dying Minister’s last words, &c., – and there was no one else! So I went, fearing, & broke down completely at Evg. So. – 4 times into the Vestry for alleds. med. & cold water: Congn. very patient, very sympathizing. I had a long way to walk back & this steep hill to climb in the darkness – how I did it I scarcely know. That night was a sad one! Early in mg. I sent for Dr. (had not done so before,) and for 3 weeks hung in suspense, my case now being severe Bronchitis: lost voice and strength, and am only lately slowly, but steadily improving, voice still weak, &c. – and now, my dear friend, you know why your portrait was not uncovered before, – and why I had not earlier written to you. This is not an answer to your last. 
	This Epidemic has been (and still is!) very common here, & several deaths from it, but almost in every case from a relapse. Indeed, my recovery is a marvel to many, its weakening effects on the young & strong is most peculiar & disheartening. I sincerely hope that you and all at Sunningdale have escaped it. 
	I cannot write any more at present: this is the longest letter I have written since Nov. 6th! (Mail for England closing today,) but I hope to write again shortly, when I am stronger. 
	My illness stopped my putting up for Kew! when nearly completed – to be resumed I hope ere long, & then dispatched. (Please tell Mr Th.-Dyer this.)
	One request I would beg to make – if you can do it without much trouble or loss of valuable time to you – viz. to ask you to send me the names of those little Alpine plants I sent you (promised in your last,) and in your doing so, don’t trouble to write an answer – wait for my next. 
	And with very kind regards to Lady Hooker and to your self. 
	Believe me, ever,
		Yours affy.,
			W. Colenso. 

P.S. Oh! dear – I had almost forgotten to thank you for your esteemed & very val. present – “Crozet’s Voy. to N.Z. &c.” More anon. 
18 January 1892
Napier, N. Zealand
January 18th, 1892
Dear Mr Thiselton-Dyer,
	At last! I am writing to you – after such a long delay. I have only this day finished putting-up two tolerably large lots of Crypts. for Kew: one of Fungi and one of Hepaticæ; adding, also, a few phænogams. I send them, this time, by Mail, and I hope they may safely reach you, and (may I add?) that Drs Cooke and Stephani may find some new & some desired specimens among them. ––
	I commenced putting them up nearly a year ago, but have been greatly hindered: first, by the unexpected and long serious illness ending recently in death of one of our town Ministers (whose Ch. duties I was called on by our Bishop to perform), – and, secondly, by my own severe attack of this horrid Influenza, on the 6th Nov. last, from which and two relapses I am only now recovering, – and was very nearly gone! but enough of that. –
	I duly received from you, in October 1890, the List of Fungi that had been determined by Dr Cooke, (and, no doubt, you have seen a large portion of the same published in the “Transactions N.Z. Institute”, vol. xxiii,) – and, also, from you, in Feby. last, the List of Hepaticæ as determined by Stephani, (this, in part, is now in Sir James Hector’s hands, as the Editor, for publication in the “Trans. N.Z. Inst.,” vol. xxiv,) – I was certainly totally unprepared to find that I had sent you so very many duplicates! and that not a few of those I had so long laboured at and described in the “Trans.” as sps. novæ were already known!! I suppose Stephani is quite correct in his decisions respecting them(?) but, be that as it may, one thing I have been taught – not to attempt to describe any more of that difficult order. (I confess, I abandon my hitherto pleasing work with sorrow!) so that of all these I now send you, I know nothing; I have not examined one of them, but send them as collected, (or, obtained, in some few cases from among roots of ferns and other small plants sent to me for naming by correspondents,) therefore, here, again, may be many duplicates and repetitions!!
	However, I may now say, that these will be the last lots of Hepaticæ and Fungi I shall send to Kew; as (now that I am 81) I have entirely given up forest botanizing, especially in those deep secluded dark unfrequented and distant gullies the homes of the dear Hepaticæ, – not possessing physical strength sufficient for that work, – which, too, has lately been so sadly lessened by this terrible Influenza. 
	I have, however, a large lot of Mosses and also several phænogams yet to send you, these I shall hope to get ready and dispatch during our coming winter. 
	In the bigger parcel are a few phænogams (sps. nov.), – also, specimens of several Gahnias, which ought to have been sent to Kew long ago with a former lot of plants, – and re which your Mr Clarke had written to me in 1890! I had always kept his note on my writing-table, and in remembrance too, but could not reply satisfactorily till now, for I could not readily find them among my many rough & unarranged bundles: – I hope these, though late, may prove of service. I would beg to call attention to my note on the genus, in vol. xviii, “Trans, N.Z. Inst.”
	I have also enclosed a small packet in the bigger box for Sir J.D. Hooker, which I will thank you to forward. I trust both Sir Joseph and yourself are quite well, and escaped the unwelcome visitation of La Grippe. We are all appalled with the daily news by cable of its ravages! here, too, have been several deaths, but in almost every case arising from a relapse, – the patient having gone out, or gone to work, too soon. My own recovery from two relapses (at my age, too!) has been considered marvelous. It is a terrible weakening disorder, – it laid me up for 2 months. 
	With every kind regards,
		I am, my dear Sir,
			Yours faithfully,
				W. Colenso. 

(In JG Baker’s hand) Parcel received March 10, 1892. 
21 Phænogams & Ferns. 
395 Hepaticæ
178 Fungi. 
Mr Clarke will report on the Gahnias, Dr Cooke on the Fungi & we will send the Hepaticæ to Dr Stephani if he is willing to undertake them. 						J.G.B.  # 


17 May 1892 
Napier, (Dannevirke 
“70-mile Bush”) N. Zealand,
May 17th., 1892. 
Dear Mr Thiselton-Dyer
	Your kind letter of March 12th, with enclosures, is just to hand, (having been, somehow, delayed a fortnight at Wellington) but in time for me to briefly acknowledge by this outgoing Mail: I thank you for it: am glad to find my parcels of N.Z. plants (scraps?) reached you safely. – I trust you are by this time fully recovered from secondary effects of this terrible Influenza, and also passed well through your Northern winter: I am very much better, indeed nearly quite well, got strength, again, & at last! in my legs & feet, – but only recently. –
	I have lately received from an acquaintance residing in the mountainous interior a few seeds of Cordyline indivisa – which I had been long desirous of obtaining for Kew. I wish they were more, but I send them as they are new and should you not have already received them from some other quarter in N.Z., may prove of use. I hope to hear of their growing at Kew. 
	Am right glad to hear from you of dear Sir Joseph being so very well: please remember me most kindly to him. 
	Believe me,
		Yours Sincerely,
			W. Colenso. 
P.S. I have written for a larger supply of those seeds, & have good hopes of getting them, & if I do, will forward to Kew. W.C. 
6 July 1892	
Dannevirke,
(80 miles S. from) 
Napier, New Zealand,
July 6, 1892. 
Dear Mr Thiselton Dyer
	I have recently received my little lot of “Author’s Copies” of my Papers in “Trans. N.Z. Instit.” for 1891, and in distributing them I send you one of each pamphlet. And as I wish, also, to send copies to the Editor of “Nature”, and don’t recollect his address, I venture to enclose his parcel & little note to your care, and will thank you to write it on them and then post. 
	I am still here in the woods, (but for Church Services at Woodville, 20 miles further S. but much lower,) and find it very cold at times. I am keeping pretty well: and hope you are quite well. I have collected a few more Fungi for you & Dr. Cooke: but though well able to walk 3-4 miles on open ground scarcely venture into a N.Z. wood: possibly may do so in the coming summer. 
	Hope Sir Joseph is well: kindest regards to him (when you may meet) and to yourself. 
	Believe me,
		Yours faithfully,
			W. Colenso. 

P.S. I have left my note to the Editor open that you may read it. W.C. 
 # 


24 January 1893 
Napier, New Zealand
Jany. 24, 1893
My very dear & valued old friend. 
	How shall I? how can I, write to you after such a desperately long silence on my part? and though I humbly beg a 1000 pardons, and say, and reiterate, that I have had you continually in mind, with a self-accusing conscience unmercifully haunting me – how will you take it?
	I dare hope, however, that you have been so closely engaged on your great work (or works) as not to have been troubled with thoughts this way concerning me. But then you had written 2 letters to me since my last to you (in Jany. 92,) and here they are before me: one of June 13th. and one of Octr. 9th. – and surely these should have been replied to? True: and I must cry – peccari: and you, in the exuberant kindness of your loving heart will, I hope, allow. And now, having passed that barrier, and said so much in limine, I will (I think) astonish you with at least one of my reasons (No. 2, infra,) for this long silence. 
	1. About this time last year I left Napier for the Bush (forest interior 100 miles away, S.) seeking strength and health, and if possible, quittance for ever of Influenza. Within a fortnight a letter came from the Bishop, begging me to take charge of Woodville, 20 miles further S., – or the Church there must be closed! I was wholly unfitted (but the Bp. did not know of that,) weakness of legs & body generally and loss of voice, but, rather than the Ch. should be shut up, I agreed to try – though friends & Med. men opposed it. And so it came to pass, that from that time down to 24th November last, I was in charge there – when the new incumbent arrived, & entered on his duties. I have no occasion to trouble you with a long particular narration of ups & downs! how I passed the wet and cold winter – obliged even to the last, to be taken to and from Ch. in a cab to my hotel, my legs refusing to walk, and so it was, while staying in the Bush, with the forest close to me! not able to go into them! living Tantalus-like all that time; but since then – at Xmas – I again re-visited my dear old haunts – Where I was welcomed: – walking some 6-8 miles in a day though dearly paying for it afterwards. 
	2. (“This to thy right-eye, Philip!”) I had received from you while there a copy of your “Himalayan Journals,” (new Ed.) – I had formerly received a copy from your Honoured Father of a portion of the same, published in the Kew Journal. – And curiously enough! at same time a letter (dated Septr. 19th. 1892) came from an old friend at Wellington, containing these words: ––
	“I have decided to forward you the picture of which I formerly wrote, viz. Sir J. Hooker on the hills in India gathering specimens of the Rhododendron: it is a pretty picture & true. I think it will afford you some pleasure, therefore I send it to you – to hang up in one of your rooms. I lend it to you – it is not for sale and I do not wish it copied. It was painted by an Indian acquaintance of Sir J. Hooker, from whom I purchased it.” ¬
	The said picture came on by train to Napier, and my man took charge of it here until I should return: and as I read on in your fascinating book, I came to your own account (at p.259) of that interesting scene – which had been since painted and sent to me. So, I said – “I must now defer writing until I have seen this picture: [presently I will describe it.]
	3. I returned to Napier in December (not a bit too soon, as all my business matters had been long sadly neglected!!) – When the Rev. C.L. Tuke, Incumbent of Taradale (6 miles distant), found me out, and begged me to help him at Xmas. time, as he needed rest. (I like Tuke, so quiet, unassuming, active, gentlemanly, and though H. Ch. free from bigotry, – and his wife, too, much like him, & they have 4 dear bairnies: T. has 3 places distant from each other to attend to every Sunday, and 4-5 services; so I agreed to help him.) Then the Dean came to see me, he, too, needed rest, and wanted me to take duty at the Cathedral for 2 Sundays (1 & 8 Jany.). I told him of Tuke: and it was ended by my being in for New Years’ Day at the Cathl. & on 8th at Taradale, – which duties I have performed. 
	4. I have been closely occupied in working-up my 2 Botl. Papers for “Trans. N.Z. I.” (having only shown rough first drafts – with the plants, at our last meeting,) the Hon. Secy. having given me “till 15th. Jany.” ere he should send in the Papers to Sir James Hector: by dint of sticking to it, I sent them to him on 14th. 
	5. During spare hours (and in times of pain when I could not write) since my return last month, I have also been engaged in putting-up a lot of Fungi &c, for Kew: these are nearly ready and will be sent to Mr Dyer by first Direct Mail: when I purpose answering his kind letters: please tell him this. 
	So, my dear friend, though I have not written to you, I have not been idle. 
	And yet there is still another reason why I did not earlier write to you: and it is as good to have it out – for though I cannot fulfill it at present yet as I fully purpose to do so, shortly, (before that I can hear from you in reply,) I may mention it: and that is that I had both wished & intended to send your son Joseph – the Botanist and “chip of the old block”, – a Xmas. Box or N.Year’s Gift: but owing to the backwardness of my tenants and to these late and new horrid extra demands from Tax-gatherers (Land Tax – in one yearly sum on 31st Decr. – Income Tax, ditto ditto, on 31st January, – with also new Rates & Taxes from Borough & from Harbour Board – & all payable in Decr.) I cannot now do so, but though not as a Xmas., such shall be an Easter Gift (viz. 2nd April,) – of this more anon. ––
	This is not intended as a reply to your 2 kind letters: but more as a preceding Herald with submission and peace-offerings – (very poor ones, though!) I hope to tell you something better in our Botanical way in my next. – one thing, however, I must not omit to notice (it has just caught my eye in your last,) you affectionately say “Little D. now 7, shows marked musical ability, and to be Organist in a Cathedral is one of Mother’s dreams for him.” Now only yesterday our Cathedral organist (after 10 years service) resigned: and on my last Sunday at Woodville, the choir, who then mustered strangely chanted “Te Deum” and “Jubilate” well – to Jackson’s glorious and ravishing music! this they did of their own accord to please me, kind, was it not? I felt my having to leave W. I had begun to know and to love the people (as well as my work), and they me. Even the dear children! such a lot, too. I had served them freely without pay – always paying all expenses. 
	I am pretty well: much more free from Rheumatism – I do think, Infl. has lessened that but this, Infl., is at times very bad, especially in feet, soles & toes, so that sometimes I can scarcely walk at all – & very painful, but only while walking. 
	Please present my best respects to Lady Hooker – and an old man’s sincere love to the “olive branches” and to you dearest old friend – all & every good thing. 
	Believe me
		Yours faithfully
			W. Colenso. 

An outline of Picture. 
Size – frame, 3. 0 x 2. 6, glazed. 
Size – drawing, 2. 2 x 1. 5. 
Fine woodland scenery & creeper, high range snowy mts. in background. You (very large!) seated under a high tree, in a smart coloured robe or gown, with coloured trousers and big shoes, points turned up & a round tartar’s cap, with specs. and very fair face looking as sedate as a judge (side face only). 
A woman behind standing with a long vert. spear, or rod, and a large quantity of big showy bouquets of flowers on the ground by her foot – all colours! –
A woman before you kneeling presenting flowers – well clothed a black dog sitting upright by her side (nearly as sedate as yourself!) and with Gold-leaf eyes!!! looking so funny. 
Two smartly dressed yg. men (in uniform – Indian?) at your right. 
Two women in further foreground (or front of you) one w. a branch of flowers & one topping another & all w. big knives. 
(copied hurriedly for Mail). 
		W.C. 
 # 


30 January 1893
Napier, N. Zealand,
January 30th., 1893. 
Dear Mr Thiselton Dyer 
	At last I have completed my task, and am therefore writing to you: having this day made up another lot of Fungi, in which I hope some sps. nov. may be found and so please Dr. Cooke. I have also added about 40 lots of Hepaticæ, – although such may gain me extra animadversions from Stephani! These last I had collected during the autumn & winter of 1892, – not so much for sending to Kew as for my own future examination (however cursory), but on my receiving, through you, Stephani’s long and full correction of the large lot of Hepaticæ, I had sent you in Jany, 1892, and finding such an enormous number of repetitions, &c., I ceased gathering any more, seeing I was still working over the same ground, and should not find time to examine them – even if I possessed the requisite ability to do so. And here I would just quietly observe, (before I have done with them,) that I think Stephani might have let me down a little more gently; for he knew, at least, 2 things; – 1. that by far the larger portion of the Hepaticæ I had sent had never been examined by me, but were merely gathered and roughly put up for a future examination: and 2. that I had not the necessary modern books of reference here, – as I had previously written to him (in reply) respecting them: and, I fear I must in justice to myself, (and in writing to you at Kew,) add, 3. that my refusal to send him any Hepaticæ (made a few years before) had something to do with it. 
However all that is over now: I never worked for sale or gain, and though it appears I made several woeful mistakes – yet being done con amore, in the Happy Golden Age of Ignorance, I had gained many pleasant hours in collecting, examining and describing them. Sic transit Gloria, &c. and here I would specially thank you, my dear Sir, for the corrected page in the Jl. Linn. Socy., beginning with Stephani’s strictures and restorations: but enough of this. ––
I duly received your kind letter of Septr. 4th, (also, an official Memorandum of 6 Octr.,) re certain Maori things (vegetable products) which had been mentioned by me in a late Paper published in “Trans. N.Z. Instit.,” vol. xxiv. – that were considered desiderata for the Kew Museum: most of them, however, are entirely matters of the past – gone for Ever!! never more to be seen: – e.g. as is Brownsonetia-flying-kite: long spears made from Rimu and Tawa woods: Resin of Aciphylla Colensoi: and a Canoe Sail of leaves of Typha angustifolia – but, the dishes of Totara bark, gum of Pittosporum tenuifolium, and Belt of orange-coloured leaves of Demoschœnus spiralis, I may be able to procure: anyhow, I will do my best & report anon. 
I trust you have completely recovered from the disagreeable remainders of that fell disorder Influenza! I regret to say, that I have not, and as it is now nearly 15 months since I was attacked, I do not expect (at my age, too) ever to be wholly free. It is, however, confined to my feet and toes (soles) and knees, and is very irregular, sometimes vanishing for 2-4 days, and often occurring suddenly and severely, so that I can scarcely walk or stand, owing to the severity of the pain; but on the whole I am wonderfully well, and I do think that (somehow) this Influenza has, with me, lessened Rheumatism! And I am still working professionally; yesterday I was at Taradale, a township 6 miles distant from Napier, where I took both Mg. and Evg. Church Services, returning last night at ix. 30 – but tired: and I don’t yet use specs. 
There are several others, and young men too, who are subject to most anomalous pains in various parts of their bodies from this Influenza. 
I wrote to your dear & honoured father-in-law last week, and I mentioned that I should shortly be sending to you. I trust he is keeping well, and if so, I know he is hard at work. The late Ed. of his Himalayan Journals I read with much pleasure during our last winter – the only book that I have read through for many a day! My kindest regards to him. –
I have lately received several specimens of our Mountain Flora for examination, &c., but in a most wretched condition! through having been badly packed (jammed!) into one tin while fresh and wet, and so kept until half or more of them had rotted! Some, however, (prima facie) are certainly new. 
I shall enclose a specimen from a plant I received last year which I don’t believe to be indigenous, and which has puzzled me. When you next write, please tell me something of it. 
I purpose putting up for you a lot of Mosses (that have been several years in collecting), – together with some Lichens, and also some Phænogams, during our coming winter, – which may end my work in that direction!
I suppose you will have long ago read my paper on “the Veg. Food of the Ancient Maoris” (“Trans. N.Z. Inst”., vol. xiii,p. 3),) if not, I think there is much therein that would interest you. 
I note what you say (ditto the “Standard”), re the publications of Cook’s Journals of his first voyage from his own log, &c. I shall hope to see, as I have ever believed there is much of real interest, and of value, too, that was omitted or overlooked by Hawksworth: e.g. the day of his taking possession of N.Z. (vide my paper on it in Trans. N.Z. Instit, vol. x. p.99.)
Twice, during several years, did I write to our Agent-General in London, upon this subject, and also to Sir Walter Buller, when there, to get it set as best by referring to Cook’s own Log – but no! nothing was done by them –
Here I must stop!
	Believe me, my dear Sir,
		Yours very sincerely,
			W. Colenso. 
21 February 1893 
Napier
New Zealand,
Feby. 21st 1893
My very dear old Friend –
	In a letter I wrote to you about a month ago I promised to write to you again shortly, so as to reach you by Easter, and I now do so: mainly however, to fulfill my promise made therein to your young & rising Botanist, (who is to hand down & perpetuate the grand name of Hooker,) and so to send you and him the enclosed Draft for £30 – that is, (say) half to you for your kind annual outlays on my account (in paying my yearly subscriptions to R. Society) – and remaining half to your son. 
	I did both hope & intend when I last wrote, to write you a longer and possibly a better letter by this mail than I find I can do at present, my time has been so fully occupied with various matters long delayed, that I am obliged to postpone writing to several correspondents in various parts of the world – both of the Old and New. From letters received I should think there must now be an increasing No. of Cryptogamic Botanists at work especially Hepaticologists. Possibly Stephani’s Paper in Linn. Socys Journal on our N.Z. Hepaticæ (and on me in particular) may have been a means of bringing them out, – or, at all events, to write to me for specimens!! Among them is a recent Paper (from Trans. Connt. Academy, 1892) from a Mr A.W. Evans of New Haven Connt. U.S.A., in which he breaks up our known Hepaticæ into 117 genera! and in so doing ignores or destroys old-estabd. ones: no doubt some of them were too large, but, for my part, I would rather that such were broken into groups, like you did on N.Z. Hypnum: but I must stop this. ––
	I worked hard after my last to you to finish making up my box of Fungi, &c for Kew: I dare say you will hear of this or of my accompanying note to Mr Thiselton-Dyer, before this can reach you. 
	I have received another letter from my old Wellington friend the kind lender of the big picture I mentioned in my last, I extract from it for your information or amusement, – the following: –
	“Glad you were pleased w. the picture. The Painter of it, (a Mr Taylor, I think, was the name,) a Commissioner in Govt. Serv. for years in India, explained to me, he had suggested if not lent the dress (a Chinese gown) to Sir J. Hooker: that those natives were his attendants, and of the small hill tribe: the Dog, I did not question him about: the Natives carry very long knives. It was a picture that most pleased me of his collection which was not so complete when I saw it, as some of his paintings had been previously purchased for some Institution in London. I have some further notes of these paintings, but have not them now handy”. –
	And again, he says: “Your nice present, ‘Hookers’ Him. Journals,’ – for this I thank you very much. I shall look into it w. deep interest, shall not forget you when doing so: the first plate shewing a view from Darjeeling, my brother would likely recognize; he had & may have still, a tea plantation up at Darjeeling.” – (I had sent my friend a copy of your work, which I purchased here.)
	I have recently received a kind of Circular from XtCh (N.Z.) asking me to join in requesting our N.Z. Govt. to republish your “Hdbook” with additions, & for Kirk to become Editor! This latter I could not support. Here I must close: Kindest regards to Lady Hooker & yourself & believe me
	Ever & always yours
		W. Colenso. 

Weather hot: 85° in my cool house. 
92° down in Bank &c in town!!

P.S. I have been keeping pretty well of late –
with more of Ch. duty on Sundays at outlying villages – TM. away. 
 # _______________


14 October 1893 
(Cook & Banks in H. Bay, and
near Napier, on this day!)
(With a local newspaper)
Napier, N. Zealand, October 14th 1893. 
My dear old & highly esteemed Friend,
	How can I sufficiently thank you for your very long and interesting letter of August 14th ? containing such narration of Sir Jos. Banks’ Journals, &c. I have just again gone over it for the 3rd time, and, “upon my word”, I scarcely know which of two emotions is uppermost in my mind – Joy at your having, at last, got hold of Banks’ valuable Journals in their entirety: or more Wonder, at your doing so much – so very much in the way of writing, – collating, correcting, &c, &c, for that fresh opus magnum – “the Index” – added to your former Herculean Job – “Flora Indica”, and, also, your numerous monthly works in Botany!! I stand aghast! and almost think – fear, you may yet overtax your brain. 
	Well: that is good news. I never could learn what had become of Banks’ Journal! the why & the wherefore thereof, &c, &c., all being a mystery to me: now you have unravelled & explained. I sincerely hope you may get a Publisher, (in such a case, I should think, the head London Booksellers would join in bringing it out, – as they used to do in former days (from their long imprints in Title-pages of many heavy works): I would that I could well help you in this matter, but I will subscribe £10 towards your getting it fairly copied (as you say) for Press: – and, if necessity arises, I will even endeavour to double that sum, and make it £20. – 
	No doubt there is a vast amount of information in it, overlooked by Hawkesworth (if H. ever had it in his possession?) – and now I shall expect to know what I have ever been so anxiously desirous of learning, viz. the very day in which Cook took possession of N.Z., which I (from Parkinson, and from Cook’s former and general manner of acting here in S. Seas,) have stated it to be on the “9th October” – but the Almanac Makers, Newspaper Editors, & others, everywhere! assert to be the 15th November 1769. ––
	Your letter arrived here on the 1st of this month. On the 2nd our Hony. Secy. wrote to inform me (1) of the last meeting of our H.B. Phil. Instit. for ’93, taking place on Monday 9th., and (2) that he & they were looking to me for my promised papers – so I had to work hard (in imitation of you at Sunningdale!) and get ready: and then I recollected that it was on the 9th. Octr., 1769, – and on a Monday too! that Cook and Banks landed in Poverty Bay and took possession: on 12th their ship was off Table Cape & Portland Island (our N. headland): 13th-15th deep in this Bay sailing round its shores, &c, &c., – and on 15th. (Sunday) the calamity occurred off the S. headland – right Cape Kidnappers! – Well, all this I brought (feelingly) before my audience, & then I produced your letter, so fittingly to hand! and read a few lines (selected) re Banks’ Journal, and its probable publication: winding up by saying – that a future generation in N.Z. will do for Cook & his illustrious band, what has lately been done at Genoa & elsewhere in honour of Columbus & that that day (9th.) should be a Commemoration Day in N.Z., – and doubly so the day & week here in Hawke’s Bay, as this bay was the only one in all N.Z. that Cook sailed slowly round and noted its shores, &c., – all true to life! I had not seen the serial “Nature”, referred to by you, as containing your paper on Banks’ Journal, &c., – it is, however, taken in at our Instit. Library, but many are always on the look-out for it, & get it: but since reading my papers on the 9th. inst., our Library copy has been put into my hands, and I have read your Paper also. It may be that you are a little too hard on Parkinson, that is, what he bona fide wrote, as such, in many instances, I have proved to be correct. (Let “Joe” look up my paper, on “Cook taking possession of N.Z.”, vol. X, Trans. N.Z. Inst. p.99 – it will interest him.)
	I note w. a sigh – and true sympathy, what you confidentially tell me, re your son in Australia, and the heavy amount of trouble that has been entailed on you! for I, too, am (and have long been) in that boat: my two sons, both in Engd. & both long married, (and, as in his case, to women sans 1d!) have cost me over £200 per ann. each for many years; and then an aged widow sister (relict of a Colonel Tucker) who has a small annuity of £30., costs me £40. a year more; so that – with those certain weights, together with Rates and Taxes, always increasing and very heavy – including Harbour Works (Breakwater, &c.,) waterworks, &c., &c, making a further haul of nearly £200. more per ann. – I have enough to do to keep my ship afloat and running! and seeing that now I am not far from Port, I do not like the idea of getting stranded on some hidden rock or shoal [Banks, financial not Sir Jos., & securities;] before I make my voyage. I saw in some of our S. papers of your son being occupied at Stewarts Island (far away S.,) – and, more recently also, of his having visited a copper mine at a place called Maharahara near Woodville: at this latter place (township) I was engaged all last year (1892) in Church work, but have not been there during ’93: had he come into that locality in ’92 I should have soon found him. I hope, however that he will have seen Sir James Hector, and that Sir James may be able to put him into a fair way – but I fear not! owing to this paltry pettifogging low Democratic Governt. of ours, and the direful apathy of the rich Settlers towards all Science – save that which will immediately interest themselves. 
	Again, I repeat, you astonish me with your account of that terrible work (of labour) “Index Kewensis” – Darwin truly enough said (what he had felt) that such a work would prove to be an inestimable benefit to all good working future Botanists. A short-time ago I received from Oxford a prospectus (& specimen) of the work – with a blank form for me to sign & return as a subscriber, but I have hesitated to do so for 3 reasons: – 1. Of little use to me, now! 2. When I drop, what is to become of such valuable high-price works? (of which class I have not a few) – send them back to London to the hammer! No-one, here, cares a straw for them!! 3. Cannot well afford it. –
	I don’t know whether you get a copy of the Reports of the “Australn. Assn. for Advancet. of Science” – but in their 4th., just out (a bulky vol.) – the Governor of Tasmania as President at the annual Meeting held there, in his Address – mentions you & Sir G. Grey, & myself – as being the only 3 original corresponding Members still alive of the Society instituted by Sir J. Franklin!! How such an incident tells!
	I am keeping well: Rheumatism painful, occasionally, in tip of shoulder, where clavicle joins scapula, especially bad at nights; and, also, curious remains of Influenza (or its 2nd relapse!) at times in soles & toes; so that I can scarcely hobble on the day, yet on the next can run, & dance (i.e. in my way). I do, however, believe (as I have told our Medicos here), that, somehow, Influenza has ½ routed Rheumatism. Don’t you (an M.D.) enquire “How?” – for I cannot explain: I merely state the fact!
	I have still my share of Church work – assisting on Sundays, often two entire services on the Sunday; the night service, however, always tries one, especially the long walk back & steep hill to climb by a zig-zag track roughly cut in it to my house – or “Hermitage”. My eyesight, however, is beginning to fail – that is, only very small print (as marginal references) and in common light, and hitherto I cannot get fitted with specs. here, and am thinking of writing to Browning, London. Just in front of my writing-room window is a fine shrub in flower – Entelea arborescens, 15 feet high; I don’t know if you have it in cultivn. at Kew, I have some stored at present flg. – this hill by seaside being its nat. habitat. its large membranous leaves – as big as dinner plates, on long petioles free & distant, & large cymes or corymbs of fine white flowers at tips of branches, make it a pleasing object and always serves to remind me of your (grander) Indian scenery. My Cordyline diffusa, is also coming rapidly into flower, a tall erect flg. stem something like that of Phormium its leaves are very long: – a sm. plant 10 yrs. ago – first flg. here. 
	I trust to get a small package ready for Kew by Xmas, not of much consequence, but among them 2 articles for Economic Museum (which Mr T-Dyer wished to have) viz. 2 bark dishes (O.S.) – Podocarp. Totara, and a woven Belt of Demoschœnus. I owe “Joe” a letter, which debt I fully intend to pay shortly (before N.Year), please tell him. 
	And now my dearest old friend – once more, Goodbye! May this find you & all at Sunningdale in good health. Please make my respects of Lady Hooker and with much love to you believe me. 
	Yours faithfully,
		W. Colenso. 
16 November 1893 
Napier, N. Zealand,
November 16th 1893
My very dear old & valued Friend. 
	I have just finished a long letter to your dear young son, which I send under cover with this to you. I hope it may not prove to be a tedious one to him! I had certainly no intention when I commenced it of writing so much – although (contrary to my usual mode) I took a large sheet of paper. I wrote to you (in reply) about a month back, and then I said, – I would write to “Joey” before Xmas. 
	I trust you are still well and strong, and, if so, working as usual. I have been very well – throughout October especially that month being wholly dry & fine, but with November came rain (welcome, being much needed,) which off-and-on, has been pretty general, glass high – 70°-75° & even 80°, but damp and close – little wind, and I feel it; not much Rheumatism, but a large amount of listlessness – no “Go”! – feeling scarcely fit for anything with poor appetite. – As soon as our General Elections are over, I intend to go inland, to my dear old haunts in the forests – though, I fear, not to work there: perhaps to say, Farewell!
	I should have gone thither this week, but the Electoral writs are only just out, and the Elections are all to come off on the 28th. inst. and as these are now with us! to be sub-Amazonian and doubly noisy – all hands preparing for the fray, or frays! (Homer’s battles of Frogs & Mice nothing to it!!) and the country hotels and Publics occupied with candidates, and committees, and meetings, &c, &c., – I keep away until “the hurly-burly’s done.”
	At present I am engaged on rather a long paper in vindication of my late deceased old friend, Von Haast, as against the Frenchman, Quatrefages; – Buller, Maskell, and others having again brought forward Q’s old paper re the Moa of 10 years ago, and got it republished in vol. XXV. “Trans. N.Z. I.” Von Haast would have answered it, had he not to go to England as Commissioner, and I had agreed to help him in it; and now that he is gone, Buller & Co. must fain bring it up again. But, I think they will find out their mistake. 
	With kindest regards to Lady Hooker – and nothing less to your own dear Self, 
	I am Ever 
		Yours sincerely
		W. Colenso. 

P.S. I also send a small packet for him, but addressed to you. 
 # 


24 November 1893
Napier, N. Zealand
November 24th 1893. 
Dear Mr Thiselton-Dyer
	At last! I am about to fulfil my promise, and write to you. I trust you may by this date have heard from Sir J. Hooker, that in my letter to him of Octr. 14th, I had told him I had not forgotten you. By this mail I send you a small box of sundries. 
1.	A Maori Dish (old style!) of Totara bark (such as you desired to have), only this one is smaller and with the rough outer bark stripped off. I have another such (a size smaller) for you – which I will send next time. 
2.	A newly woven belt of Demoschœnus spiralis, manufactured purposely. 
3.	A few specimens of Fungi. 
4.	Ditto of Hepaticæ: several of these I have long had by me, collected in the interior N.W. from Napier, having been put aside in a drawer with a few small orchids & Mosses, were overlooked on former occasions. I fear, however, you may not find many spns. of value among them – both Orders. –
5.	A few spns. small Grasses from the Alpine District: these spring from small turfs of tiny plants brought to me, & carefully planted in a large flower-pot; they may prove to be sps. nov., – or some of our known small mountain species described by Buchanan. 
6.	A couple of Garden plants: 1, Eugenia, and 1, (called a “Pine”!!) which I believe to be a sp. of Melaleuca, (?allied to M. gibbosa, & to M. squarrosa – (words missing) Benth. Flor. Australiensis) but I have never seen a spn. of that genus. –
I should not write to you now, but for the Dish & the Belt & my Promise, as I have not yet been able to put together for you, some Phænogams, Mosses, and Lichens – but hope to do so before long. 
I suppose you have received a copy of each of my Papers (“excerpts”) in vol. xxv. “Trans. N.Z. Inst.”, I mention this, as I have been recently battling here with our P.Off. authorities about some missing book parcels sent to England by me, and this day, my man at P.Off., in carrying out my instructions, (the weather pouring rain – not permitting my going to town), had a long fight with the officials in getting my little box registered; as they will not register “parcels”, but they will “Books”. 
Some time ago I sent you some seeds of our N.Z. Palm (Areca sapida); when you next write I will thank you to tell me if they have germinated: as some I sent also to others in England failed to do so.
I think, in my haste yesterday in packing the little box, in the memo. on the “pine from Cuba”, – I did not state, – that such is the common name of the plant here with the gardener who brought me the spn. I enclosed: and just so, and for many years here (in spite of all I could say), Entelea arborescens growing here in its own proper habitat) bore the name of “Paper Mulberry” = Brauss. papyr.!! ––
I hope this may find you quite well – free from Rheumatism. I am very well at present. –––
		And with kindest regards
			Believe me,
				Yours truly,
				W. Colenso
 
8 February 1894 
Napier, N. Zealand,
	Feby. 8th 1894
My very dear old friend,
	I wrote to you briefly on 16th Novr. last (tho’ at same time lengthily to your son “Joey”) and now, last week (Jany. 29th) yours of “Nov. 9th” (but postmarked, “London Dec. 11th/93,”) arrived, and gladdened my old heart pretty considerably. Such a long and interesting letter! and you having such a world of writing to do! I have read it, again and again, w. thanks, and w. widely different feelings – for you give me both black & white, sunshine and gloom, and, may I say, I go thoroughly w. you in all!
	In your grieving over your dear friend, Prof. Tyndall, (a man whom I have long highly honoured & esteemed) whose doubly tragical and distressing end I have only first met with in “Standard” Newspaper since I received your letter: yet, as I am here, I could wish such a quick departure for myself. – and in the loss (pro tem.) of your able zealous assistant in this additional opus magnum, “Index Kewensis”: I hope, however, that his further visit to Isle of Wight may have served to bring him quite round again. I am much interested in your detail re “Banks’ Jl.” & the Londn. Bksrs., &c, and hope that preliminary is over and the printers duly at work on your copy provided, and that I may live to see it published – though unworthy, for my mind has lately been half upset at reflecting that I had not fulfilled my promise to you, of aiding pecuniarily in this matter; and this feeling has been increased through receiving from you (per Wesley & Co.) a copy of part I “Index Kewensis”, and so I determined to go to “work with a will” – and I have lately sold a piece of land, that enables me heartily & lovingly to send you the enclosed £50 – in 2 Drafts = £53, (the over-plus £3. is for “Joey”, to add to his stock in the Bank, as the dear young fellow wrote to me in his note) – said piece of land fetched me £200, divided thus, £50 to you: £50. towards a Bishop’s Endowment Fund, absolutely needed now: £20, subscription to fund for poor Settlers here who lost their all in a great flood in December: and £50. to a hard-working aged Settler w. family (an old friend) who had lost considerably lately. And I feel happy, a load off my mind, that I have this £50. for you – to redeem my promises for “Index Kewensis,” or for “Banks’ Journal” or for any other purpose you may please: it is yours, only say nothing about it. ––
	With this I send a small registered packet containing a little souvenir from N.Z. for Lady Hooker and a copy of my old paper (in “Trans. N.Z. Institute,”) re Cook’s taking possession of this Country – that you may have it handy, & read what I have brought together in it; for I believe Parkinson to be correct in his “log” – or Journal, as to that particular entry, – more than Orton, Cook’s Clerk, who evidently, was a free & easy careless fellow, (see Cook’s Journal, passim, respecting Orton, & particularly page 258, an incident also given fully by Parkinson,) – P. was a remarkably steady & observant young man, member of the “Society of Friends.” I like his “Journal” & have in several instances, proved its correctness. There may be a few other items re N.Z. in my Papers that may interest you and you can give the Pamphlet to “Joey.” –
	I have been carefully cutting open top pps. of “Index Kewensis,” (paper very thin, such contrast to that of Cook’s Journal, which is too thick!) dipping in here and there, full of wonder at your work, w. your able collaborators. What a boon for future Botanists! What a world of labour & loss of time you would have saved had such a work been executed earlier! How you can possibly escape many errors I can scarcely conceive – indeed, you already have a Corrigendum. I have noticed 2-3 entries with their future generic references I should like to enquire concerning, but I dare not do so at present, I will wait. One however, that seems complete I will mention, i.e. under Anthericum: – 
– Hookeri – Bulbinellæ sp., &c. –– 
“– Rossii – Bulbinellæ, sp., &c.” ––
Why are neither placed there? ––
Why Hookeri in Italic, & Rossii in Rom. letters?
	Three days ago I received from you an early copy of your speech at R.G. Socy. Meeting, – on a Paper by Dr Murray on “Antarctic Exploration.” I scarcely need observe how deeply your remarks have interested me, (caused me to see, as it were, you & some of your brother officers, and Ross himself in his big sea-boots wading in the calm sea on Paihia beach, collecting, – and the queer-looking ships of the Expdn – at anchor,) – surely all proper attention will be given by the authorities to your remarks. I have often looked into Ross’ Voyage, generally to see about you & S. Botany, and mostly in the cold stormy nights of winter – when I contemplate the pictures! and during last winter I also brought forth from its long sleep, a ponderous 4to. of Ross’ voyage to the N. Pole, and went over that. Likewise Paul Marcoy’s travels across S. America, from Pacific to Atlantic oceans, 4 vols. Folio! with 600 good engravings – a capital work (though, I fancy little known,) which has greatly interested me, (a second kind of Cook’s Voyages – of old, when a boy,) I have had that work nearly 20 years, (pubd. in 1873,) hidden away in lumber-room owing to size, under bundles of plants, mosses, &c, &c. 
	I have also Weddell’s, Magellan’s, Tasman’s, LaBillardiere’s, Krusenstern’s, Kotzebues, Vancouver’s, Wilke’s, & others: and I find, at least, one consolation in growing defective memory, that I can and do go over them again & again, and pick up something new(?) & interesting every time. 
	When I last wrote to you I was very well, but, alas! on 16th Decr., I was again attacked by Lumbago! and this shifting occasionally to sciatica, then to pelvis & trochanters – so that my Xmas. & N. Year were anything but happy seasons – save my knowing that others were enjoying themselves, and this state of chron. Rheumatism kept me back till very lately, so that I have not yet been to the Bush for this summer, but hope to get away thither next week. At same time I know that I shall not be able to get into the virgin forest, & therefore do not think I shall be long away from my town Hermitage. “Rus in urbe.”
	Since date of my last I have passed another “Jubilee” – of my first coming to Hawke’s Bay in 1843, also, another Birthday, and “all alone in my glory” no one to drink my health w. me. 
	Our Bishop left us (for ever, on Earth!) last week, gone to become a Missionary in Persia!! an old man past 60. I wrote to him in Septr., on first hearing of it, against it, telling him plainly my mind, and so far clearing my conscience. In losing him I have lost one of my best friends – if not the very best one, in N.Z., one I could badly spare. There are “2 Richards in the field,” at present, for the vacant Bishopric, if one succeeds, then, I suppose I shall have to shut up – as I consider him, my bitterest enemy! but, bide-a-wee. The young clerics and myself do not – can not pull together: I am not “High Ch.”, and they know that well. I fall in w. Dean Stanley, my cousin the late Bp. of Natal, Jowett (alas! also lately gone,) and others like them in theological matters – as Paul said, “a reasonable Service.” 
	Being tolerably well up in Ancient Ecclesl. History (which many of the younglings are not – though I lend them my books); I fancy that even you might be kept from napping in Church if I were preaching – for I seek always to tell the truth, and that too sans Ch. garnish old and new; and as I say to my Congn. I, an old experienced man apply same to myself, and (as I am never paid – always stand my own expenses of all kinds,) I do not seek popularity, nor work for hire, Oh! that I were younger for this work! but – – – –. Here is a scrap for Lady Hooker: the children – wee bit bairnies – used to be on the look-out for me at Woodville on Saturday afternoons, on the arrival of the train, to catch me on my going to the Church to see that all was in proper order, &c., – the little toddlers without boots, ran along the road, asking in their prattling way – “Going to preach tomorrow, Mr Colenso.?” It always amuses me, aye & pleases me, they are sure to come in for a corner of my sermon on Sundays, which they well understand & remember. I endeavour to keep in mind how the Great Teacher dealt with children, and that “the common people heard him gladly.” I have some youthful correspondents there at Woodville, from 6 to 10 years of age, as I like to write to children. A dear little girl named Ethel, 7 years old, wrote to me before Xmas saying, her father was going to take them (herself and younger brother, Edgar) to Christ Church for the holidays, and there she should see an old lady (probably her grandmother) past 80 yrs of age, who can thread her needle without specs. “Like you, Mr Colenso in the pulpit with your small pocket Bible”. –
	Of course, my painful disorder hindered my taking any Church duty – save once, obliged to go or shut up Ch. – I was helped into & driven thither in a cab, as I could not walk, & managed the work in Ch. well enough: and I am also down for next Sunday evening. 
	I begin to need specs., but only for very small type and in bad light; and fear I cannot be supplied here: have made several trials with “oculists’ opticians.” (so-called) – yet must try again, – or send to Browning, London. 
	I have lately received a lot of spns. small plants from the alpine interior (not Crypts.), unfortunately they are sadly damaged in collectg. & in carryg. but I think I may find a few novelties among them – in Dracophyllum, Helophyllum, Veronica, Raoulia, Ourisia and Forstera: one spn. in particular has attracted my attention, as being wholly new to me, I shall enclose a flower, to get your early opinion on it. 
	I send you a Newspaper containing a long letter of mine on Aciphylla, in which you are prominently mentioned: also, in another Newspaper, a letter of mine on Holcus, & on Cincus: and a third letter (this morning!) on Arctium. –
	Weather of late very fine & hot – sultry: thermr. here in my cool house 76°-80° daily. I don’t ever pay any attention to such things, but my heart has lately (during 2-4 months) bumped away at a terrible rate – not fast but loud & strongly, regular in its rhythm! but kicking-up such a row as almost to stop my reading or writing, – or even to my hearing the rain or the rustling of the leaves of the trees outside; such lasts about an hour, or less, then it subsides – goes to sleep! Like that famous Geyser in Iceland, of which your honoured Father wrote so eloquently. Some folks, I fancy, would be frightened at such erratic & abnormal movements and visit a Doctor’s surgery! May I ever be kept from that! ––
	And now my dear friend, once more, Good Bye! Don’t be too hard on a garrulous and prolix old man. Please make my best respects to Lady Hooker: – and to you – now as ever, eternal love & affections,
	Yours affectionately,
		W. Colenso. 

P.S. closed, Feby. 10th. ––
Engaged 3 days – “off & on”!


 # 


28 March 1894
Napier, N. Zealand,
March 28, 1894
My dear old friend,
	An incident has just happened, which causes me to write to you – instanter – a few lines only by this extra Mail. 
	Last evening the Hony. Secy. of our Society lent me a big catalogue of Books, lately received from London (from Quarritch), – and in going over it (or, rather, rushing through it!) I met with the following item, which made me stare: I copy verbatim for you: –

“Lot 792. Banks (Sir Joseph) autograph Ms. of his Voyage in the Endeavour with Capt. Cook, unpublished, 2 vols. calf. 410” – page 60. –
	also:-
“Lot 74. “Bidwill’s Rambles in New Zealand, 1841” with 2 other books. 
–––––

“To be sold by Auction by Sotheby, Wilkinson & Hodge, at their House, No. 13, Wellington Street, Strand, Monday 28th May, 1894, and 2 following days.” –––
Lot, No. 792, on the 3rd day of Sale: Lot, No. 74, on the 1st
From a “Catalogue of Books, formed by J. Henniker Heaton M. P.” (Nearly all on Australian, Australasian & N.Z’land, things & matters: and many valuable works among them.)
–––––

Now if “Banks Journal” is genuine, I would go as high as £21. for it, (provided you don’t require it): and for “Bidwill’s Rambles in N.Z.” (which, for many years, I have been seeking in vain!) – any fair price – say, to £2. or so. It is a sm. book: there is now a copy Wellington Pub. Library. Bidwell stayed at my house, on his return journey, (Paihia, Bay Islands,) –
	Can you possibly manage this matter for me? –
	Quarritch seeks Commission to purchase – but??
	Dear “Joey’s” kind letter and loving book-present are to hand “all right” – will write anon. 
	I am keeping well, very busy as usual! Kindest Regards,
		W. Colenso. 

2nd part of “Index Kewensis” to hand. 

 # 


10 July 1894 
Napier, N. Zealand
July 10, 1894
My dear old friend,
	I had but just finished putting up a small book packet for you, (viz. “Authors’ copies” of my papers in vol xxvii “Trans. N.Z. Instit”., recently to hand from Sir J. Hector), intending to write a few lines w. them, when your letter (aye 2!) of May 20th. arrived, our mail closing today, and I not very well, (a strong gale of wind & rain!) all I can at present do is to acknowledge them w. thanks – and, also, your most kind letters – of April (!) including Lady Hooker’s and your dear son Joe’s: – (Eh! What a sinner I am in not having ansd. these last!) I have, however, been ill, severe colic & obstinate diarrhea, (rather seriously while it lasted,) up in the Bush, too! End of May & beg. of June, obliged to call in Med. aid, – when med., low diet and confinements to bed & room, brought me low and very weak when I did rally; and since my return to Napier, I proceeded with my putting up (slowly) Crypts. for Kew – long promised – Mosses, Lichens, &c., hoping to have finished them for this Mail, and then, also, pay my debts – write to you & yours there in your Tusculum, – or, better, perhaps “dulce domum” at Sunningdale. – But “bide-a-wee”. 
	On the whole I am not sorry I did not get that copy of Banks’ Jl., – though I hope the Brit. Mus. may yet possess it, I trust to do better w. that sum of money: besides I am beginning to think (no!) have long been exercised thereon) what to do w. my val. library. – I cannot understand Henniker Heaton – but, there, that is nothing to me! –
	Re those pubd. papers of mine I now send you: I wish to call your particular attention to one in defence of Von Haast – read, too, at Wellington, before his pseudo-friends! and note specially, at end, my 2 apt. quotations – 1, from Tacitus and 1, from an early Pope of Rome (1st & 4th.) Clement, whose Ep. to the Corinthians was then read in the churches together w. the Apostolic (Canonical) Epistles! I have a double reason for adducing this. Maskell (a Governor, too!) is an out-&-out R. Cath., & now & then shows it there at these meetings; but I don’t think he knew (at the time) of my authority, &c. ––
	Another paper – on the Agave, will interest you, I think, – if you are not already aware of its many flg. suckers! – and also (in same papers) my anecdote of you and Sinclair in Bay of Islands. I hope you may remember it, and so have explained it to Lady Hooker. 
	Obliged to close in haste. Pray make my very best respects to your dear wife, Lady Hooker. I purpose writing to her ere long: also, give my love to our dear boy Joe – whom you have there and, I hope, all well. I feel indebted to him also! Væ mihi! shall I ever repay? I fear, you are working too hard – too closely. 
		Ever my dear old friend,
			Yours affecty. 
				W. Colenso. 

P.S. My youngest son, in Penzance, Cornwall, tells me the Clianthus does well & flowers there in his garden twice in the year. but more anon. 
						W.C. 
 # 


13 September 1894
Napier, New Zealand,
	Septr 13th. 1894
Dear Mr Thiselton Dyer
	At length I am able to breathe more freely! having this day concluded putting-up those long-promised Crypts. for you. You will scarcely believe me when I tell you that I commenced this long & laborious job more than six months ago – having had many hindrances, chiefly however the taking Church services away in the country, and so absent 2-4 weeks at a time: – indeed, I only returned on the 7th from Woodville (100 miles S.) whither I went in August for 3 Sundays, the Incumbent being seriously ill with Influenza. 

I. Mosses
II. Ditto
III. Lichens
IV. Mosses:
- Hepaticæ
- Fungi
- Algæ, f.w. 
- Lichens, 3 spns, also 3 spns of 
phænogams	              
There are 5 tin boxes of Mosses, and Lichens, with a few specimens of Hepaticæ, Fungi, & Algæ (f.w.) – altogether several hundreds of lots – though, I fear, not many wholly new or valuable ones: I know there is a large quantity of specimens often repeated! – the collections of years; intended (as in the case of those Hepaticæ put to rights by Stephani) to have been examined and compared by myself, – but such was not done, and now never will be! and I have had a great mind not to send you (say) half of them (i.e. of the Mosses), but I have put up specimens of all, not willing to cast aside a single specimen, as such (unknown to me) might prove of some service. 

	Several, too, of the Mosses (of those I had collected 7-8 years ago) I had partially examined and named – from the “Handbook Flora N.Z.” and other works on Muscology. Some, probably incorrectly. These generally bear their names written on examination, and also a double number (smaller and within brackets), this is given, that, should you wish for more specimens of them, I may the more readily find them for you, as these (so marked,) having been partly examined by me, are kept separate. I should remark re several small scrappy specimens (mostly from the Alpine interior, and from Poverty Bay), that such were casually collected by others, and sometimes sent me in letters, and attached to other plants. Moreover, there are some sps. nov. (chiefly Hookeria) that have been described by me in the “Transactions N.Z. Institute”, – differing from those others described by Hooker in the “Handbook”: I may, however, have erred in so describing some of them. I shall give a list of them and the vol. and page “Trans.”, in which their descriptions are to be found – as a help to your expert Muscologist. 
I may mention a curious error in the numbers of the Mosses, which I did not detect in time to rectify it, viz. – that on putting up lot No. 3399, instead of making the next No. 3400, – I made it 4000! and so carried on. 
I have still a lot of Phænogams for you, among them several sps. nov., but cannot send them now: hope to do so soon. And this dish (No. 2) of Podocarpus bark shall be sent with them. I have also, a good spn. of a woven floor mat (Phorm. tenax) 6ft. x 4 ft., composed of regular strips 1/6th inch wide, and made 40 years ago (still unused and clean), which I would send for the Museum if you would like to have it. There is nothing of the kind made now: but I think your side should pay expenses – as freightage &c. I suppose, however, your Government are not generous enough to do this!
You may have heard from Sir Joseph that I had sent him copies of my papers published in this last vol. of the “Trans. N.Z. Institute,” – and found that, on this occasion, I did not send you any! the reason this – that as you had just been elected as Honorary Member of our Society (together with Dr Codrington – to fill up the prescribed number of 30), you would of course receive from Sir James Hector a copy of that vol. containing them: and as I only get the old limited number of “Author’s Copies” (25) – nothing near enough for my growing wants, I was only too ready to omit forwarding to you (pardon me this). I must also congratulate you on your election – and I may add that, as a step towards it, I had early written to Sir James in your especial favour. 
29th. I now close. I had intended to write to my dear old friend Sir Joseph by this mail (now closing), but the Annual Diocesan Synod, closed late last night, has prevented me: I hope to do so by next Mail. Please give him my kindest best remembrances & regards

Believe me, my dear Mr Thiselton Dyer,
		Yours faithfully,
			Wm Colenso. 




 
7 January 1895 
Napier, New Zealand
January 7th 1895
My very dear old friend. 
	I must not allow this mail to leave us without a line – at the beginning too, of the New Year: – and I heartily wish you and all yours at Sunningdale the good old English greetings of this season from the Antipodes – hoping also that you all are well. 
	I do not intend this to be an answer to your last, (now before me in an ever-growing big bundle of unansd. letters!) I am, I may say, getting pretty near the end of my recent heavy work. When I do so I purpose writing to you fully: so trust me a little longer. I think I may truly say I have not known for many years such a busy time as of late – 3 past months. I have not known a holiday, working Sundays, too! With this I purpose sending you a paper, which will help to show you (in part) how I have been engaged – in fighting the Rom. Catholics! They began the fray. I did intend to send you copies of all my public letters (7 in all) on this question – but I feared to try your patience and steal away your valuable time, and so I only send the 1st and last: the first – that you may see how it originated, & the last that you may know a little more of what your old N.Z. friend has had to meet and fight with in days of yore! (stern realities!!) in this Country: and possibly my experience to Bay of Islds, at those times, too, (your winter Home & anchorage in “Er.”, & “Terror,”) may serve to recall not altogether unpleasant memories. But the public letters were only in small part of my late & present labours: 2ndly my Botanl. papers for Trans. N.Z. I. Last year (Sept-early Novr.) I was called on to aid our branch Institute with Papers (promised), and as they had commissioned an Australian portrait painter residing in this District – an artist celebrated in his way to paint my port. in oil for me – I consented to do my best: at last, I had 2-3 papers draughted (not ready for press) which I produced & read from, showing spns. mounted, &c., and had till 3rd Decr. given me to have my fair copies ready for Sir J. Hector, (not yet finished! væ mihi!) Then came suddenly the braying of the R.C. clarion – war note! and at same time, or nearly so, a call to help in our Ch. No. 2, in this town, through Minister unexpectedly resigning charge: & then, in further addition, letter from abroad, and specimens – fresh alpine! from several quarters – all wanting speedy replies! My oldest acquaintances say, I am “a Wonder” – as to work, health, freedom from old chronic Rheumm. age, &c, &c. ––
	Now my dear old friend, forgive my shortcomings – my apparent forgetfulness – not really so, I assure you; and take my part (if needed?) w. my yg. friend “Joey” and Lady Hooker. 
	And w. kindest regards and best wishes – hoping & fully purposing to write again – soon: Believe me. 
	Yours ever & aye
		W. Colenso. 
15 April 1895
Napier, N. Zealand, Easter Monday,
April 15th. 1895
My dear & valued old Friend, 
	How are you? must be my first line, although I can get no reply. I hope very well – you & your wife & family all hands quite well at Sunningdale: notwithstanding your late very inclement season, which, I fear, may have killed some of yr. choice plants around your Tusculum. I have long been very desirous of writing to you, but have been continually hindered by a multiplicity of things – work, work, always on duty (sans pay), at the wheel or elsewhere in this big ship. I think I scribbled a note to you in the beginning of this year, just to let you know how I had been situated, and promising speedy amendment, hoping for a quiet time; but I little knew then what was coming! Shortly after my note to you we had to prepare for the Consecration of our new Bishop (on 20th Jany.), a great Ch. time here: and after that, all hands great & small (new Bp. Dean, Archdeacon, Canons, &c, &c,) went S. to Nelson to the General Synod of the whole N.Z. Church, – and heavy duty fell on me both for Cathedral & St. Augustines’ Ch. in this town, which continued until past the middle of Feby. – then, for 24th Feby, I had to go to Dannevirke (80m. S.) Ch. Services there: then back here again for Ch. Service early in March: then again to Dannevirke for Sunday 24th March, and further S. to Woodville (duty): in intervals correcting sheet of proofs for “Trans. N.Z. Institute”, vol. xxvii, from Hector, & answering many questions – re plants, insects, blights, &c, &c., besides all that I have had (& still have) a heavy amount of business, including much writing for myself – & many others, – as an (or the) old settler much has been entailed on, or grown with me. Now all this by way of preface!
	I have no letter from you for ’95: indeed, I did not expect neither deserved any, for your last kind ones have not yet been responded to. But I have received Vol. III “Index Kewensis,” and, more recently, (in Feby.) Lady Hooker’s welcome & valuable Xmas. remembrance, in 4 lovely large photos of your paradise; which, I trust, is still retaining its old glory renewed by Spring. 
	I read with avidity your dear son’s long extract from Sir Jos. Banks’ Journal re Poverty Bay, &c., but was disappointed in not finding more that was new. I suppose that you have not been able to meet w. London Publishers to carry out yr. wishes respecting its publication. 
	I have not yet found time to dip deeply into this III. vol. “Index Kewensis,” although I have managed to cut open all its leaves (as, also, of both parts I & II) which I do while resting, or “lying on oars,” – just as a smoker might take a whiff ’tween watches & “spells.” – I noticed, however, your cutting adrift Phormium Colensoi – which I regret for several reasons. You mention Jolis, in vol. III “L. Jl. Bot.” but I think you overlooked my explanatory letter to your Father in vol. IV, l.c. Seeing too, that, both Dieffenbach & yourself had seen the plant growing in my garden at Paihia; so that should “Colensoi” be deleted, I think “Forsterianum” has the priority – (is not this clearly shown by you in your HandBk. N.Z. Flora?) But it is not so much for that, as for the name you gave it having been so long established, through your own choosing, as to have become quite a “Household Word” among us, – and in all Government Papers during the last 30 years, and also a Cosmopolite in Gardeners’ Catalogues, & letters by the score: and I have noticed, that Bentham in his “Flora Austral.” has sometimes acted in a similar way, – i.e. not disturbing an established name well-known; and if I mistake not, you (and Baker, too) have so dealt with some Ferns, &c. And I am, I fear, writing too much on this subject seeing it is too late now. Yet it is just what I should say, were we together. 
	I early wrote to Auckland (Cheeseman), and to Wellington (Hector), and down S., re the “Index Kewensis,” & hope they may all get copies. 
	I have received, during 1894-5, from kind friendly amateur collectors specimens of several mountain plants that are new (to me): a few only of them have I found time to examine, – one, a Trochocarpa, has pleased me much, though I want more & better spns. Also, a Colobanthus, Cerastium, Sagina, Claytonia, Nestera, Caladenia, &c, &c.; – and 2 Ferns from our lower woods – an Adiantum, and a Hemitelia, own collecting, (which may (?) even pass Mr Baker’s scrutiny!) But spns of all I fully intend and hope to send to Kew during our approaching winter months – when I shall be shut up in Dock, though not to hybernate. 
	I intend to write to Lady Hooker by this Mail, but I had better give you some of the dry details. It was my intention to have looked-up some nice striking N.Z. views, at Xmas. time here in our Bookseller’s shops for Lady Hooker, knowing from advertisements in our local papers that such would be there: but the close work I had in writing re Rom. Cath. Ch. at that season, – also copying my Botanical papers for Sir J. Hector, which were sadly delayed, that, when I went to our shops, the best were gone! I was told – “More were coming,” but I have not been so fortunate as I could wish. However, last week, I secured some, intending to send them by this S.F. Mail, but now I find, that the S.F. Mail does not take the “Parcel Post”! So my parcel will have to be sent by the “Direct Mail,” leaving here a fortnight hence. I did hope to get it sent by the “Book Post” per S.F. Mail: but here again am I check mated, my parcel being 4 inches too long, and 8-10oz. too heavy! their Book post limit being 18 inches length, & 4 lbs. weight. This official “red-tape” delay has caused me some vexation – loss of time in going to town and arguing (in vain) with P.Master, &c, &c. – but, as the old adage runs, – “What can’t be cured, must be endured.” Now do you, as a good loving old Friend, put all this into your choicest flowery & poetical language for Lady Hooker. 
	I am keeping well in health – “a wonder”! all my old acquaintances say: certainly much better than I was a few years ago, freer from Rheumatism, which I set down to my terrible long-pull (2nd relapse) of “Influenza”, age, of course, telling: eye-sight beginning to fail for reading small type (margl. references, &c.) save in strong light and the worst is – I cannot get specs. to suit! I get sleep every day soon after dinner (1 p.m.), in spite of all my exertions to stave it off! 5-6 minutes, however, is all the sleep I seem to require; sometimes I doze off sitting in my chair at writing, – and have curious fits, mg. & evg. regularly, of strong sneezing. I tell you all this as an M.D., and having no teeth left, and cannot be fitted by any dentists, unless I submit to have a number of stumps drawn, that are firm as rock, – they proposing chloroform, which I will not hear of, – and so I am obliged to live on soft food – but I endeavour to be content w. thankfulness. ––
     Easter Tuesday, 16th: night. 
	I send you a paper of this morning, which contains a remark or two on me in connexion w. Dannevirke from some unknown writer that may interest you. –
	It also contains sad news of the stoppage of our S. Railways, also the Coach road between Woodville & Wellington, owing to this long and severe gale; the passage through the tunnels in the Gorge at Manawatu being again blocked! and the wires also down!! I scarcely know how this Mail is to leave Hawke’s Bay, so as to be in time for the S.F. – steamer at Auckland. ––
	Once more, my very dear old Friend
	(I may truly say – my Dearest!) Good Bye. 
		And with every good wish,
			Believe me, yours heartily,
				W. Colenso. 
 # _______________


7 January 1896
Napier N. Zealand
Jany. 7th 1896
My Ever Dear Old Friend
	I cannot allow this mail to close without sending you a few lines – If only to wish you & yours a most “Happy New Year”, and so, here at the Antipodes, keep up the good old sayings of our forefathers. 
	I have been thinking much on you during last few weeks. 1) the 4th vol. (& last) of “Index Kewensis” received all right, made me to think, to dream of you, and to rejoice that that very heavy & extra labour of yours was now completed! The ship off the stocks and in deep water! and 2) which preceded this – your speech & Introdn. at the great Geogrl. meeting – re Antarctic Exploration – you being the only officer left of that old (Ross’) Expedition and voyage! caused me to get up a lecture for our branch N.Z. Institute, and tell them what I had personally seen & known – of you all, & of your fearful ducking on that occasion. 3) The issue here (Dunedin) of an account of those S. Islands you had then visited, w. photos, a copy I now send you in a Book post parcel (and also a few little souvenirs for Lady Hooker), believing that such, w. account of those Islands and of your plants will interest you. I should have written before but I (too) have been overwhelmed w. work, sadly pressed for time – owing, of course, to the great injury my right thumb has sustained in Railway train, 100 miles away, on 29th May: – At first & for some time I had feared I should lose the first joint but it has been preserved and is only now beginning to be of service! a dreary long time & often in intense pain. This threw me back in everything – thumb bandaged & in the way and I alone! however, that over, passed. Only yesty. I sent to Sir J. Hector my Botanl. paper (read here last yr. from loose and unfinished drafts) which should have been w. him in Nov. – and, as a matter of course, being the only “emergency man”! I have had to help (when required) both sides i.e. all parties in Ch. matters. ––
	And though (as folks say) “I am a wonder to my age” – 85, yet, I tell them, the Co. of Sappers and Miners are closely at work, tho’ not seen at surface till the time. However, I am keeping pretty well, notwithstanding daily Rheumatism, which often evokes a jolly loud grunt. Our Bp. & Dean too, being absent from N.; on Sunday last I had 2 whole Ch. S. to perform, Eng. at Cathedral, Eng. at St. Augustines and got through both – but very tired (I never read a serm. – could not do it). I have not been out of my hermitage for this summer season (not since May last). Hope you & yours are all well: two delightful photos, lately to hand of your 2 sons, greatly admired here by my visitors: thanks to you & kind Lady Hooker. Make my very best respects to her, & kind regards to all, and believe me,
	My dear old & esteemed friend,
		Yours affectionately,
			W. Colenso. 

P.S. Letters from Kew received, intend to reply, &c shortly. 
Kind regards to Mr. T- Dyer. 
 # _______________


2 June 1896
Dannevirke, in the forests,
80m. S. from Napier;-
June 2/96. 
My very dear Ever remembered old Friend, ––
	Often, very often of late have I desired to write to you – in reply to your most welcome letter of March 2/96, – received by me on 16th April, – but have been as often hindered – so many cross & counter currents prevailing. I came to this place on 15th May (for my annual Xmas. or Summer holiday – till then blocked!) bringing your letter (also, Lady Hooker’s and others with me) hoping to answer leisurely from these forest fortresses. 
	Not having been in these parts since May/95, I have had several small 1-2 days journeys to make, N. and S., since I came hither – but now am free – for a short season! and so scrawl to you. 
	First then, many thanks to you (and also to Lady Hooker – fearing I may not be able to write to her also by this mail) for all you have sent me. Letters and photos., eh! I do feel indebted greatly to you both. I rejoice to hear of your good health – of your daily labour! and of your advancing w. your opus magnum (Fl. Indica) – which, may you, ere long, finish, & then rest from such labours!
	I am also delighted in knowing from you of your getting on so well w. Banks’ Jl. and in your having such an able coadjutor in your own son Reginald – my best regards to him. Tell him to imitate his Father, keep up the name of Hooker ever & not to mind hard work. It has been my lot (also yours) and I feel thankful for it. More of Banks anon. 
	With you, I regret Banks did not accompany Cook on his 2nd voyage. I think I have already told you, how much I like “Forsters Voyage”, (2 vols. 4to.) and “Observations” (additional 2 vols. 4 to) many excellent thoughts, too, scattered throughout those 4 vols. of pater et fil. I have not met w. “the last life of Cook by Besant & Dr. S.”(?) mentioned by you. 
	I sent you a Paper last month containing an abstract of our Society’s proceedings at Napier, (a short one, & mainly, of course in such a paper on the £.s.d. side of the matter). In my “Presidential address” (by the way a long & varied one, I mentioned you – w. much pleasure quoting what you had said re Huxley at the first Meeting of the Memorial Com. also, what Lord Kelvin & Playfair had so kindly said respecting him. I may tell you that I was induced to say more re Huxley on this occasion from the fact several clerics being present & others there – who think more of themselves and their dogmas than of Huxley! Moreover, as I also told them, Huxley was an Honorary Member of our N.Z. Institute (early elected thereto same year w. Sir G. Grey), & further (like you), had anchored in By. Islands in “Rattlesnake”, Capt. Hobson, in 1836, – I being there, – and then I had also to speak of Mantell, and of others, here, lately dead – another loss to us – last year. Profr. Parker (Dunedin) F.R.S., has called on me to assist him in obtaining subscriptions in these parts in furtherance of the Huxley Memorial – but, I fear, small support will be the result – hope Parker may be more successful down S. 
	I should much like for my “address” to be published, for various reasons: and so I wrote to Hector 3 wks. ago, asking him “If it could not be pubd. in the Vol. of Trans. N.Z. I. for next year”, but hitherto no reply: absit omen. I fear I have unwillingly vexed Sir James through a remonstrance of mine of last year re their (the Comee. of Governors) setting aside – or sitting on – all my papers that contain reminiscences of olden times. However, I may yet hear from him, although this last is the 3rd letter of the last 3 months that I have written to him and not answered, neither acknowledged. I know he has been (and perhaps, is) very busy: Hector (like yourself) is always so. You, no doubt, will have had your thoughts re my offer of £1500 and a freehold site for a Museum and Library building: and to that I should also add a lot of specimens – Various, some unique! But whether such will be followed up by our Bœotian-money loving folk, is another question. I doubt it, and if so – my specimens will go elsewhere to say nothing of money – which (at present) is in land. I have had lots of praise(!) pats on back, &c, &c., but mostly from poor savants (at a distance). Buller says, “My offer is sure to be felt & followed throughout the Colony, it will stir them up.” My closing remarks re (travelling) “parsons”, has, however, given offence to the cloth! (No new thing however, on my part.)
	An unexpected event has recently happened. Proofs of the 1st part (A only) of my old Maori Lexicon have come to me here from Govt. printer! (and never paid for!!!) (copy sent in to them as ordered, in 1886). Seddon (Premier &c, &c,) had promised me, writing officially, last year, that this small portion should be done at Govt. Ptg. Office. If it cost them no more than £20 – I agreeing to pay all above that sum and since then I have had another kind letter of explanation from him showing cause of delay. I saw him too, twice last week, in our travelling by train, (S. however, in “Reserved” carriage), when his language and manner were both “A1”. 
	Unfortunately, I shall see no more of this work published: my memory, &c, &c, fails! However, “Est quaddam prodire tenus, si non datur ultra”: and small & unfinished though my tractate may be, I am thinking of dedicating it to you & to Darwin & to A. Cunningham – all of whom I have known in the flesh on the shores of N.Z. 
	I mention this to you w. this proviso, viz, that should you object to it, you will wire to me at once on receipt of this just one line “Colenso Napier, object, Hooker.” I will gladly repay (ere long) the cost of Cablegram. 
	And so you have received and read Buller’s pamphlet! which is more (the reading) than I have done & for similar reasons to your own – smallness of type and to spare my old eyes – but then I had known a little of the matter. B. has long had many enemies – in various ranks of life and very recently has been engaged in a wordy warfare in our Napier papers re that same matter: the fellow, his adversary, a low parvenu, (a fussy Maori Interpreter & advocate in their Land Courts lately created a “J.P.” – w. many other such!)
	I wrote to B., to cease writing, and he has, at last, done so – perhaps only for the time. (See a letter of Buller’s in paper sent with this). 
	You have kindly given one much very interesting news of your dear family, all hands in your ship in Cove Sunningdale. Well: I do heartily wish them well. I sometimes indulge in a rare flight of fancy – a long one, too, far, far, away! to you & your tusculum, your beautiful “Home” & family, & your work, and your zeal & love and ability for it!! Heigh ho, What a contrast! You there – me here. 
	Well, I too, have Society – in my Books – and my varied work, which I also love. I have only occasionally held Church Services of late: but on 24th ult. took two, whole duty, at Waipukurau (40 miles W.) going thither on Saty. & returning on Monday, & finished Eng. S. quite “well and hearty”, walking back to my hotel, ½ mile rough roads, carrying my own swag: and I am keeping well save a little Rheumatism at nights in bed – generally on one-under side at a time, bearable however, with now & then a British grunt! Please tell Director at Kew, I have not forgotten him, am getting ready (slowly but surely) a case for him adding mats, baskets, &c. 
And now, my very dearest Friend, Good Bye. 
Kindest remembrances to Lady Hooker, yourself & all at Sunningdale, from your attached
		W. Colenso. 
 # 


19 August 1896
Napier, New Zealand
August 19th. 1896
Dear Mr Thiselton-Dyer,
	I have this day nailed down & directed my case of long-promised lots to you! and right glad I am to have finished this long & heavy job. If I were to say, that the looking over, culling, &c of all my many scores of heterogeneous bundles and parcels of plants has taken me nearly 3 months (“off and on”) you would scarcely believe me, yet such is the case: I using my little parlour as a workshop (it being winter and my fire-place in it) and desiring my friends and visitors not to call, until I had completed my task: much, too, of it having been executed in pains from chronic Rheumation in arms & shoulders, – yet, sometimes, the determined holding-on to my work served to lessen if not to overcome pain: all this by way of prologue. 
	I will give you a kind of list, or rough memorandum of articles now sent. –
I	Phænogams: –
1.	Most of those described by me in vols. of “Trans. N.Z. Institute”, a few I cannot yet find. 
2.	A lot of those brought home for examination but never examined; some, I trust, may prove to be sps. novae. –
3.	A lot of Coprosmas – unexamined. 
4.	All my Gahnias, – as they were collected and laid aside. 
II. 	Crypts: –
1.	several new Ferns, – described. 
2.	a small lot of mosses, Hepat., Lichens, & Fungi. 
III	Maori textile manufactures: –
1.	a plain floor mat, new, more than 45 years old. 
2.	an ornamental ditto, of recent make. 
3.	several ornamented baskets, various patterns, (Maori name, Kětě)
4.	small spns. of hand-made twine, nearly 60 years old, and,
        a Totara-bark Dish, the fellow you have. 
For Lady Hooker:
1.	a parcel, containing a Chief’s first-class dress mat. 
2.	a small box, containing a pair of turned wooden vases Dacrydium cupressinum, 
and her Ladyship is to select two of the baskets. 
With my published 380specimens I have given the Vol. & pages in which their description is to be found. In the case is also a rough list of the smaller Crypts sent. 
I have sent you all my specimens of Gahnia (in their original packets), because I was (and am) vexed; at your (assistant) stating, those spns. I had formerly sent you to be of known N.Z. species! It is possible, indeed likely (such being really the case), that I had not looked-out for you spns. of each species so fully described by me; and, therefore, I had determined to send you all – though I can never replace them, as the plant in these parts is exceedingly scarce, – I have not seen one for many years; all that hilly country where they were to be found having been fired (by settlers) and burnt up! I do hope, whoever may examine these specimens, that what I have written concerning them, after much study of the living plants, (“Trans. N.Z. Inst.,” vol. xviii, p.278, et seq.,) may be well-considered, particularly my note on the genus at the end.
I duly received the long List of Mosses as determined by Dr Brotherus, and was surprised to find so few new or strange ones in it. (I suppose Dr Brotherus is an expert.) But I make no remark on any – save on one species, – i.e. my Bartramia Readeriana. which Dr Brotherus says, is B. comosa. – this I venture to dispute: and I do so, because (1) I have pointed out in my description of that moss its differential characters from B. comosa, (Trans. N.Z. I. Vol. xvii, p.258,) – and (2) that at that time I was corresponding with a distinguished Muscologist residing in Australia, and (among others) had sent him specimens of this very same moss for his opinion on it, and he replied, that while near to (as I had said) it was specifically different from B. comosa, Mitt. 
Please Mr Thiselton-Dyer, let this one Moss be closely examined for me. I think I must still have several of my described & published mosses hidden among my lots! Well: I yet hope to “try again.”
Among the Hepaticæ now sent, are a few of my described Symphyogynæ, (from my mounted spns., and therefore were forgotten, & omitted in the lot formerly sent to Kew): these, no doubt, are some of those alluded to by Stephani, when he says, “There are a number of other species published of which no specimens have been received.” (Journal Linn. Socy., vol. xxix, Botany. p.273.)
I should like for Stephani to see these. From his remark, I suppose there must also be a quantity of Hepaticæ not yet sent to you! I must have another overhaul for them: ––
In yours of Oct/95, you particularly wish for spns. of Ranunculus sychnopetala, and R. longipetiolatus, and Caltha marginata. I regret much not having been able to find the two former: I send spns. of Caltha marginata. 
I am pretty certain that Mr. Baker will (again!) not allow of some of my Ferns being sp. nov. I suppose, we (two) will always be opposites. I bear in mind, however, Mr. Baker’s former errors re some of my early described ferns, (e.g. Lindsæa viridis, Polypodium sylvaticum, Dicksonia sps,&c) which he afterwards, slowly acknowledged to be valid sps. And (as I have not infrequently said, and written,) I consider my knowledge of our N.Z. ferns – fully examined in a living state – to be superior to Mr Baker’s knowledge of them from examination of them (or, it may be parts only) in a dried state at Home, – that is, in comparing them with other known N.Z. species. And, while I say this, I readily acknowledge that, as to Ferns of other countries, I know little or nothing, and am not worthy to carry Mr. Baker’s shoes in this matter. Please tell him this, with my compliments. I would rather that he too, could have condescended to read my descriptions of spns. nov., for I generally give also their differential characters from their allied species. 
	I regret that some of the specimens I send are very small ones; and some in an imperfect (half-rotten!) state; but they are the best I have, & in some instances all I have. 
	I would thank you for a brief memo of any sps. nov. One little one especially interested me: unfortunately (like too many of the Alpine plants) it came to hand in a sad state: on briefly examining it I thought it might be a species of Tapeinia, a Falkland Island & Chilian plant. 
	You will find one (at least) curious and unique specimen of Cord, or string, more than 60 years old! see its history, (“Trans. N.Z. Instit.” vol. xxiv, p.460): this has ever excited great interest, my little reel of it has been shown at all our Southern Exhibitions. ––
	The larger strong plain floor mat, is a sample of what the Maori women used to make for the floor of their Chief’s houses – and for my own dwelling-house, and particularly for their Chapels after they had received Xy. In some of my larger Chapels these mats were more than 80 feet long, by (say) 30-40 feet wide; the Congregation sitting on the floor without raised seats. Every Monday morning the big mats were rolled carefully up; underneath them were strawed Bulrush leaves (Typha). 
	Here I must stop, I hope all may safely reach you. With very kind regards. 
		Believe me,
			Yours very Sincerely. 
				W. Colenso. 

P.S. I have directed my Agents at our port to ship the case by first good opportunity, and to send you Bill of Lading. W.C. 

P.S. Sept 23rd. Not having sealed my letter, I can now add a few words. I have been waiting to ship the said case, and only this day have succeeded, per S.S. “Hawke’s Bay”, which ship arrived here from London on the 20th, and is to leave tomorrow. Through friends the Captain has been specially seen, who has promised that extra care, in stowing, &c., shall be taken. I have been very unwell since I wrote, which still, I regret to say, lasts. 
	Looking over it, I have nothing to add, save, perhaps, a few more words, by way of making more clearly my difference of opinion with Mr Baker, re some (?all!) of my described and published Ferns, – as to their being distinct species from their congeners already known. Of course, here, in the first place, much depends on what constitutes a distinct species. On this point I have no contention: but, secondly, I say, – that A. is not B. nor B., A: call them, if you prefer it, sub-species, or varieties, I shall not contend with this. Mr. Baker has gone to some trouble in publishing (Vid. “Summary of New Ferns described since 1874” (1891). Oxford: 1892) his particular views re many newly discovered Ferns, and that curtly and rather dictatorially! perhaps without once referring to their published differential chars! I have been long supported (both here & abroad), as to my reasonably having a superior knowledge of our N.Z. Ferns to Mr. Baker; possibly Mr. Baker is not fully aware of that. 
	Once more, my dear Sir,
		Good Bye!
			Yours faithfully,
				W. Colenso. 

P.S. 2nd Septr. 28th. ––
	Since writing my P.S. on 23rd, I have received a letter from my Post Agents, who shipped the Case to you – containing B/L. with memo of their expenses and charges. I am surprised at their sending me B/L to forward to you, as, in my letter of instructions to them of August, I had requested them to do so, as the shippers: – I enclose it. One good thing, resulting from my knowing, and writing to, the Ship’s Agents, Messrs Williams and Kettle, about the Case, is their generously allowing it to go freight free: moreover, interesting themselves with the Captain to give the case an extra safe and good berth on board: so I hope it will reach you in “good order and condition”. 
	I have further written a letter of thanks to Ms. Williams & Kettle. Our outgoing English Mail via ’Frisco is about to close, so this will be with you before the “Hawke’s Bay”. Some of the baskets, or kits, were rolled up, &c, &c, by me, in packing, but being very soft & elastic they will recover their shape, &c., on being slightly damped and spread out. 
	Among the specimens of dried plants not named in the case, is one that gave me some little trouble (not being perfect and not indigenous) No. 7012: I think, I have very recently found it out, or its near ally, – Trifolium arvense, – though differing, I think, in its very aristate calyx, and similar stipules, with petiolulate leaflets, &c. – T. arvense, is quite unknown to me. 
	Once more Good Bye: ––
		Yours faithy,
			W. Colenso. 
 # 


23 September 1896
Napier, N. Zealand,
Septr. 23rd., 1896
My very dear old friend,
	My last to you was in June: – since then no less than 3 letters from you; and all in July (viz 12th. 17th. 26th.) What shall I say? Whether I consider my receipts of prizes, – or, your increase of labours thus unwittingly caused by me. Curiously enough your 2 letters of 12th & 17th arrived together at Napier, on 31st August: at the time I was absent, in the Bush country, and they were forwarded to me there, and proved salutary, aye cheering! Your third reached me here on the 14th. inst. 
	Imprimis: I must tell you why I have not written before: because on 19th August I had finished my long task of filling up a big case of “all sorts” for Kew (with a trifle in it for Sunningdale): and had also written a long letter to the Director, and a letter to Lady Hooker; but I was wanting to have my case shipped; and then post my 2 letters: during which interval yours (3) arrived, and I determined that mine in reply with them should be all posted together. And I have only this day succeeded in shipping the said case in the S.S. “Hawke’s Bay”: my port agents having selected a good opportunity. May the case of sundries arrive safely! and please all parties concerned. As a matter of course I suppose you will see my letter to the Director, I hope so: and, if nothing more, spns. of my published Ferns sps. nov. Do not be greatly surprised at my remarks on Baker (Kew). I could say much more on that subject, but I refrain. 
	Now to your letters: re my gift to Napier, so eulogized by you – very little (I fear) has yet been done by the Settlers in that direction: Cui bono? is the common cuckoo-cry of all! – together with (I am told) a spice of jealousy. However, a move may yet be made in the proper direction, as the summer advances: the “Municipality” will do nothing (save increase Rates!) ditto ditto, the General Government. However, “bide-a-wee”: tempus revelat!. 
	I am glad, beyond expression, at your having, also, finished your new Banksian labour (I gather this from your last letter, in which you also sent me those admirable photos. of Banks and his Lady from old medallions! They have been, and will be, admired here. I look forward to your book with much interest. We have long had in our Society Room two good and large-size portraits of Cook, and Tasman, framed & glazed. 
	Yes: I have received the last part of “Index Kewensis”: and have from time to time, wondered at your Herculean labours and, again, at your surmounting them, all! Ere long, I hope to hear you say “Done” (as Gibbons did to his History of Rome) to your bigger & longest-in-hand work – “Flora Indica”: yet after that I verily believe you will not (cannot) absolutely rest! but still continue at something easy and pleasing in Botany. 
I confess I felt a little disappointed in reading of your son Joey relinquishing his Botanical studies; as I had earnestly hoped he would keep up the ancestral name of Hooker in Botanical science. At the same time I could never think of coercing him; and I trust he will do well at Cambridge, in every sense. I can enter into your feelings re your valuable Botanical Library, Papers, &c – for I have similar ones (feelings) in a lesser degree, re my own Books, &c., which I must leave (ere long) with, I fear, a pang! not knowing what to do with them – your very interesting accounts of your son “Dickey”, and his tastes and pursuits and love for music; and of your unmarried daughter, who has taken to Charity organisation work in London, – are rightly pleasing. 
	I note what you say in reply to my proposal Re Dedicating the first part of my Polynesian Lexicon: unfortunately that work has been again stopped! Only a few pages (first half-sheet) having been received & revised for press by me. Of course the (ostensible) cause has been the enormous amount of printing required for the Parliament during Session – still going on, knowing that, I am quiet, but as soon as the Session is over I shall again jog our Premier’s memory. Very likely you are altogether right in your loyal remark re Sir G. Grey – and, to a very great extent I agree with you: but Sir George might have acted, might have spoken a word in season, many years ago: (he did such in other similar cases, yet inferior ones.) and then the long-neglected work would have been executed & finished, which now it never can be by W.C. Indeed, judging from past experience, I do not believe that this small first portion of it now in printing hands, will ever be printed, – we shall see. 
	Should it be carried on and finished I will gladly (for you) carry out your very proper request concerning it, and thank you for it. You mention your having lately seen Sir George: should you see him again, I will thank you to remember me most kindly and loyally to him. Sir George knows me well: I trust he may live many years yet in peace. 
	I thank you for setting me right re Huxley having been in N.Z., (or, as I had put it, in “Rattlesnake” w. Hobson in our N.Z. waters,) – but for the life of me, I cannot understand your paragraph, when you say, “I think it was in 1846 that the “Rattlesnake” was commissioned under Stanley who, shortly before sailing, came to Kew, to offer me the Assistant surgeonship.”
	Surely there is an error here, in dates, &c, as you had returned to England from your Antarctic Voyage?
	I have no doubt of your being highly interested in “Franklin’s Life.” I only knew Lady F., & had several letters from her. 
	It is grievous to hear of the havoc your last Northern winter played among your N.Z. Veronicas: I trust you have been able to renew from Kew. The number of N.Z. species of this genus is continually increasing, I have not infrequently been puzzled with some – almost hybrids! – Kirk, I see, has come out (in his usual way) on the genus & species: he assumes vastly too much – in everything! A short time ago I was amused (?) in seeing in a Wellington paper a statement of Kirk’s viz. that he had lately received from you coloured plates of many of the Veronicas. 
	There are just two other items in your letters that I do not understand: (1) “the portrait of Robert Brown of which I sent you a coloured autotype of last year”, and (2) “the little medallion of my father which you have, was taken from an ivory miniature, &c.” There is a little mistake here, as I have not seen them. I have a dark bromide portrait of R.B. – not coloured, size 6 x 4; and a 2/3rd sitting portrait of your honoured father, size 7 x 5, apparently a lithograph (“D. McNee, circ. 1835”)
	Now for a few words about myself, 1st health: 3 weeks back I caught a very severe cold, while in the Bush, (such being then prevalent); I was shut up a whole week through it. I came away, however, pretty well, but got a kind of renewal in the train, and it has been haunting me “off and on”, ever since – coming and going like the tide! This week our Diocesan Synod. is in Session and I am a prisoner in own house. I attended on the Opening Day, (18th.) & was also at Cathedral on Sunday (20th), but at present dare not move out. I am very much by myself – and I prefer it – I like to work, say, till x, or xi, p.m. if I can hold out, as then I sleep well, & my appetite is good. I begin, at last! to want specs, for small type, but cannot hitherto, be well fitted here. – 
	2nd work: I continue to help my clerical brethren in charge of Parishes, by taking duty for them – to enable them to visit the outlying districts, or when ill: and can do both mg. & evg. S. in Church in the one day – sans fee. Like you, I love work, am not happy without it. Most however of our young clerics (“vicars” their new name), are more or less advanced High Ch., and still stupidly & matricidally uphold the plenary inspiration of the S.S., which I oppose (i.e. as far as I may): and, of late, excluded from one pulpit (at Dannevirke, for which Ch. I had done so much!) on account of the novelty of my preaching (conversely) – viz. the creation, as in Genesis I: Sabbath: Jews historical stories & Myths, &c, &c. (Though, possibly my having larger congregations, and so many of the younger & educated folks being with me and showing it, may have something to do in the matter). I think I sent you a copy of my little book on the “Sabbath”, some years ago, but I will gladly send you copies – as I should like for you to read it. Mr Justice Gillies (a long-headed Scot) in a letter said, he was so highly pleased with it, that he had read it to his family. Several others – particularly in Melbourne have also spoken highly of it. 
	3rd In finance: there is a great falling-off, and I cannot yet see the end of it. As I told my Banker the other day – “I thought I should soon have to begin to nibble on the principal”; – this, caused by the atrocious “calls” of the Bank of New Zealand, (which has ruined several of our old Settlers – Prof. Hutton of Christchurch to wit!) and the much lower rates of Interest now paid by Banks (the max. being 3% and this only on a 12-months Fixed Deposit, while from this “Income” the Government demands 6d. in the £, or 2½%!!! However, I hope to find sufficient to keep my head freely above water. Then there is, also, the ever increasing Rates & Taxes: and the enormous number of poor – really poor, in town, together with wanderers – outcasts – homeless – daily applicants, 4-5 strangers each day, seeking charity! and the just claims must be met. I hate all worry & bother re money matters. And now, (as it were to wind-up Jeremiah with a song!). I gladly send you – as a good old paterfamilias – while I may have it – a small Draft (enclosed) for £50; as the old Maori proverb has it – “he kete iti he kete aroha” – i.e. a wee-little basket [of food, understood], but one of love: and so my dear old friend, make the most of it. 
	Buller is still fighting his way to land, but not yet got into smooth waters, he (as a dernier resort) applied to the Legislative Council, sitting, to allow him to plead at their Bar; this (after discussion) was disallowed; I hear he is getting out another pamphlet; he has very many against him. – Believe me, I have ever been thankful that I never dabbled in securing Maori lands – never had a foot! though no person ever had the opportunities I had: lands frequently offered me freely by their native owners: in this matter I ever loyally kept the Regulations of the C.M.S. – For matters political I must refer you to the Papers of the day: audacious, terrible, & highly dishonourable are some of the doings of our Government Ministers, & worst of all! their supporters uphold them in it!! 
Your name turned up suddenly in conversation the other day. I had a visit from a Dr. Moore (one of our A.1 Med. practitioners), bringing a jug of chopped dried herbs in decoction from the bedroom of a woman found dead, and who (from a p. mortem by Moore) had been performing an operation on herself!. Moore wished me to determine them, – I tried, and said, (1.) they were not indigenous herbs: (2) they were of 2 kinds, Compositæ & Labiatæ; but without prolonged examination, and more perfect spns. I could not positively define, yet I thought non-poisonous. (Afterwards stated by the herbal-doctor here to be Tansy & Pennyroyal). Well, with Moore came his young brother-in-law, a Dr Hughes (new arrival, & first visit) and while in my library & work-room, he looking around saw on shelf “Hooker’s Brit. ferns,” and exclaimed, “Oh, I knew the son of that man in London; he holds a Government appointment,” I replied, “Very likely his grandson; a son of Sir Jos. Hooker,” – to which he assented, but our talk on that subject soon ended, as the medicos were in a hurry to finish their enquiry for coroner & Jury. The bare mention, however, of having seen a living Hooker & your son! sent a kind of semi-electric thrill through me – raising the past, and easing the Old Solitary a bit. 
I have run the gauntlet, as President & Chairman, through 5 of our six fixed meetings (H.B. Phil. Instit.) for 1896: and hope also to attend the last on the 12th. proxo., but no Papers (proper) of mine this year, only semi-lectures – observations – discourses, &c., given from a few rough notes. 
Sir James Hector never replied to my letters: I cannot any longer continue to write Papers to have them rejected by the quasi Board of Governors – all, more or less, unfriendly to me; who, also, admit much of rubbish, written by friends, that have often been complained of. I may, however, have one Botanical paper, having (again) 2-4 Ferns – one, a perfectly new Davallia (Microlepia) – specimens sent in case to Kew. ––
And now, my very Dearest old and staunch friend, I trust you will allow I have repaid your 3 kind letters – in quantity at least: and, also, speak a word for me to Lady Hooker, for all seeming disrespect or inattention. It may be that this is my last letter to you! Two days ago, when on bed (through suffering severely from cold), I fell asleep, and dreamed, – a man or being, stood at my side, sent to inform me, that my days were numbered, and that I should die on attaining my 86th. year (on 7th. Novr), I replied, “God’s will be done.” I am not superstitious, never was, but it made a slight impression on me: – my Father, too, having died at that age. However, we will see: I would not tell this to another. ––
And with the kindest and best feelings and wishes, Believe me,
Yours, ever and always,
	Affectionately,
		W. Colenso. 
 # 


1 February 1897
Napier, New Zealand
Feby 1st 1897
My very dear old friend –
	Your loving, long & prized letter of Decr. 4th., reached me here a fortnight ago, and I thank you heartily for it. I am writing now by a “Direct Mail” – instead of waiting 3 wks. for my usual S.Fr. one: and this for 3-4 reasons. ––
1.	To send you with this ½ dozen of my “Sabbath observance” which you say you would like to have: and more for you if wanted. –
2.	To mention my fears of the non-arrival of the Hawke’s Bay steamer, that took the case of sundries for the Director at Kew: I cannot learn anything respecting her from her Agents here. I hope, however, she has arrived, and that lot safely received. 
3.	To thank you for “Banks’ Journal.”  of this vol. rather a curious story – I had been desirous in the early summer Octr-Novr. to go inland to the mountain woods, hoping this way to get rid of my old obstinate cold: but owing to various hindrances (and another severe relapse) I could not get away until 9th Decr. And on the day previous an Eng. Mail arrived bringing books & papers galore! I selected some to take with me, leaving a heavy large book – believing it was a work by Majr. Genl. Robley on Maori tattoo, preserved heads, &c, &c. (an unpalatable gruesome subject w. me!) as he had (again) written to me a long letter by this mail, & has promised to send me a copy of his book – just then pubd. Well: I went inland to the Bush: got better: returned on 31st. Decr. to Napier, and found plenty to do, including Services every Sunday at St. Augustine’s in this town. By-and-by came your letter, and lo! ray of light! that book, still unpacked was surely “Bank’s Journal” – and so it proved to be. Heigho! was I not wild, for I had several spare days in the Bush. However, I have managed to cut it thru’ & have dipped into it here & there – intending to take it up regularly shortly: – (this month just past having been an extra busy one w. me – through such an influx of visitors from a distance, it being Xmas. & N.Year holiday seasons w. them, – and some, perhaps, taking a last sight of this aged man.) I again (first-time in your Ms. sent me) read Banks’ landing, &c at Poverty Bay – then stay at Tolaga Bay and finally at Mercury Bay, – and am disappointed re not finding more to the purpose: so that I fall back at what Parkinson wrote in his Journal re Cook having taken possession of N.Z. at Poverty Bay: (see, if you have time, my paper on it, “Trans. N.Z. I.” vol. X, p.99). Banks has only very brief entries, of the Astronomer & transit of Mercury and also of the illness and death of his devoted draughtsman Parkinson: – while on smaller & insignificant objects (comparatively) he is so very full and clearly recording all about them, showing that he was a keen & close observer and wrote largely on what specially interested him, particularly Natl. Histy. – Botany & Zoology. But when I go through it regularly I shall know more: one thing I can now say, that though disappointed (supra) I am much pleased w. the book, and so I told Buller, & also our Bishop, & others who were here seeing me last week: they have each ordered copies of the Book. 
4.	To tell you of the Hawke’s Bay grand failure re my offer made to them in May last towards a Museum. But I must cut this short. We met in Committee on 15th Jany. (up to date I had heard nothing) when I found the great sum of £168. – had been promised by about a score individuals: a few old personal friends giving £10. ea, and (to his honour be it recorded) Father Binsfield of the R. Cath. Mission, £3.3.0! none of our Ch. clerics subscribing save the Bishop, £2.2.0 – but he is not rich & has a family. But Mr McLean (only son of my old & quondam friend, the late Sir Donald McLean) who had recently been elected by us as our M.P., in his conversation w. me in Decr. had told me, he was willing to give the subscriptions received several years ago for a statue to his father (amounting to, say, £600) for museum and Library – provided his Sc. Comee would consent, who have always been strong for statue – I, too, being one of that Comee., having both subscribed & collected, – and that he would add thereto so as to make £1000. Well, I told the Comee., that since such was the case – I now wholly withdrew my offer, but that since Mr McLean – able, young, educated, travelled on continent &c &c., rich; married with a rising family, a large stake in the District, and a hearty desire to carry out the original plan of a Museum, &c., had promised £1,000, I would support him and subscribe £500, – leaving it to him to carry it out. Many words followed: some too high to be written: and finally we broke up in disorder!! I have not since been into the town, and our Annual Meeting is on the 8th inst. – which, I suppose, I must attend as President, but it may be my last appearance there. I fear much of the failure is to be attributed to low jealousy. Not one of the wealthy settled folk around thought of subscribing, though all have been visited w. a Circular, their tastes mainly go in other and opposite directions – Racing (w. its betting), theatres every night, Hunting (imported hares!) Polo, Caledonian Sports, Football, & other outdoor games – a legion! and the newest Craze of bicycles! Mr McLean (almost the only rich sheep-farmer who does not patronise Racing) said – “Why the money put through the totalisator at one day’s racing would suffice for a Museum!” (sometimes, £6, 7, 8000!)
You rightly ask re “my difficulty of your going w. Stanley?” and my own stupidity! for I had supposed that offer was made to you before you shipped in Erebus. –
I have ordered a copy of Herbert’s vol. III “Principles of Sociology,” from my old Lond. Booksr. Wesley: if you get his portrait engraved I would gladly accept your kind offer of a copy: but, “How long have I to live?” Eh! and what of all my loved prizes here which I must shortly leave. I should not lament this, if there were one single individual here handy to whom I could leave them – who would really care for them. I have sent (the Hony. Secy.) my Presidential address of last May to Sir J. Hector, with a view to it being pubd. in “Trans.” 1897, (being advised to do so by Buller.) and have again written to Hector about it. though, in my so doing I fear I have lowered myself, Hector not having answered my 3 former letters. But, as I had told him, I wish it to be pubd. in “Trans.” on account of what I have said about our lately deceased Members – Mantell, Meinertzhagen, and Tiffen, of Napier, and particularly Huxley: as this last has been “sat on” by the Clerics & their blind followers & the “unco guid” of this place. – I also told Hector, that several of those who were present in May wished my address to be pubd. as being my last words; but I would not consent to an abstract of it, or extracts from it – all or none; for if not pubd. in “Trans.” it would be pubd. here as a tract – as other rejected papers of mine were before: however, we shall see. ––
I am not a little pleased with your generous remark, of your being delighted to hear of my being still actively engaged in clerical work. I have preached at St. Augustines on 3 Sundays in Jany. and helped on a fourth, (to aid the resident Minister who is unwell & a good fellow – cannot, however, say this of all, some of them (young folks) have told me – “to avoid novelties”: i.e. in my reading Gen. I, &c, and preaching on Creation, Noah’s flood, &c. I fancy some were taken aback with my sermon on Jany. 3rd (being within the Xmas season,) text – John XVIII. 37, “For this end was I born, and to bear witness of the truth.” I told them – in limine – many no doubt had been engaged in singing Hymns, Carols, &c, &c, and thinking on Bethlehem & angels, & shepherds, & the birth of Jesus, & Joseph & Mary, & the Magi, & the manger – but, How many on this text, His own clear statement? and then my showing His Truth (not always the Churches’ truth) and the value of Truth – in everything ecclesiastical & secular – Truth above authority – true religion and true Science being equally from God: concluding w. the aged Paul’s solemn charge to Timothy, (1 Tim. VI. 18.) My sermons are really sui generis: always preached, being well studied, and deviating from the common ruck of conventionalities, in not first giving out a text, but with a suitable preface – times, people, &c. And I always have most attentive hearers. I would I had a pulpit of my own: two sermons on a Sunday I can manage w. reading Lessons. I not infrequently read the Lessons as one of the Congn. – wherever I am. And as I never get paid, not even my expenses, I can afford to be more free, more independent, & I tell them so: pardon all this, you have drawn me out. 
Right glad am I to know of your having completed, at last, your great work on which you have been so long labouring, con amore – your Flora Indica. You have good cause to be, as you say – “thankful.” Glad, too, to know you have such useful aids in preparing its enormous “Index.” Am delighted to hear of “Joey’s” doing so well at Cam., and with you hope he may yet cling to Botany (his first love); remember me most kindly to him. 
Am glad to know that Lady Hooker & you visited poor dear Sir G. Grey but saddened in reading your account of him – so low! I, too, who had seen so much of him in the hey-day of life – in my 5 years Parly. vocation (1861-5,) and received so many kindnesses from him. My own end, too, is not far off: I dare not pray for it, but I have ever wished (in my heart of hearts) to die suddenly – like a bp. of Canterbury, “Cease at once to work and live.” a glorious death – or, rather, removal. I do not fear death, nor dying alone but I dread pain. 
The printing letter “A” (only) of my Mao. Lexicon is advancing very slowly, I have lately revised for press to p.48: it is of no use attempting to urge the Govt. Printer. I suppose it is half-through now, and I venture to hope it may be completed before Parliament meets in June – but quæ. The Printer had the whole of the Ms. about 10 years ago; and (to tell the truth) I have forgotten much of what I had written – that sweet euphonious Maori language I knew & loved! –
Here we have lately (29th-30th ult.) had a terrible gale! my own place garden, shrubbery, &c. is a wreck! the last of my prized tall acacias (A. dealbata), fine robust trees nearly 40 years old, uprooted, with many others. I grieved over my dear old trees close to my door &c. In the winter season their flowering was gorgeous! admired by all. The Captain of a ship in the sandstead was killed by a sea on board of his own ship. I send a Paper re storm. My wooden house too, leaking like a seive after such a long drought & crispingly hot time; I had some trouble to secure my Mss. 
Pardon my long scrawl – I write to no one as I do to you: my oldest and best, and now almost my only friend: and this may be my last! May God bless you and yours. Best respects & kindest regards to Lady Hooker: and to you – all & everything that is good & loving. 
	Yours heartily,
		W. Colenso. 

P.S. I am keeping well: I still read & write without glasses, though I need them for small type, &c. My appetite is good: I sleep well, i.e. if I don’t retire till xi.30 or xii. – I sometimes find it difficult to keep up until that hour here alone. W.C. 

P.S. 2nd (Feby. 3rd.) ––
Looking over what I have written, I should add a few more lines – just to make things a little more clear – 16000 miles away. Our main difference (self and clergy generally), is, they say, “the Bible is the Word of God”: I say, “the word of God is in the Bible and in many other national Bibles & books & things”: that gold is gold wherever found in whatever matrix, and so of Truth. The God in whom I believe and trust & serve, is living & speaking now to all of us – If we had but ears to hear, and hearts to think & receive: that if I were obliged to choose – which; the Word of God in the Bible, or the word of God (spirit, in my heart & mind) I prefer the latter: & so we fight! (Perdonnez moi!). 
7 May 1897 from JH Holder
Woodville May 7th 1897
Sir J. D. Hooker
    The Camp
Sir
	Your friend Mr Colenso being still unable to write, wishes me to write a few lines to you & Lady Hooker that you may know how he is after his very severe accident on his return from his last botanizing trip to the Mountain near. By last months mail I sent you papers concerning it. Mr Colenso is now progressing favorably though still very weak from the severe nervous shock and loss of blood. He sits up a few hours daily; with both night & day nurses. The Doctor however says that his case is getting on well especially in so old a man. He is also very cheerful under it & still hopes to write you bye-and-bye. By a note from the Post-master at Napier he believes that a parcel containing photos is in store for him there on his return. I sent to your address a paper containing an account of the late calamitous floods at Napier – and adjacent country. The weather here is very fine at present. Mr Colenso sends his affectionate regards to you to Lady Hooker & the family, hoping you are all quite well & that this may find you so. 
I am
Yours faithfully
      Jas. H. Holder. 
 # 


7 June 1897 from R Seymour Fannin
Dannevirke	
June 7. 1897. 
Sir J. D. Hooker
The Camp,
Sunningdale. 
Dear Sir
Mr. Colenso being still unable to write has requested me to do so, to let you know of his state. 
He is still very weak having only left his room on the 2nd. inst when he arrived here from Woodville, but as the weather is very fine for this season of the year, he now takes exercise daily in the open air and ventures to hope he may be able to write you himself briefly by the next S.F. Mail. 
His arm is still very infirm though improving slowly. 
He trusts that you, Lady Hooker and the family are all quite well, and sends his most affectionate regards. 
I am, dear Sir,
	Yours truly
		R. Seymour Fannin.
2 July 1897
Dannevirke (in the Bush)
Napier, N. Zealand
July 2nd 1897. 
My dear old friend,
	This morning I was thinking of writing to you when, lo! 2 p.m. your kind note of May 20th is to hand, I thank you for it, and am right glad to find you were so well, & “strong to labour” in your beloved vocation – go on and prosper. 
	I came to this place of sojourn on the 2nd ulto., having been 63 days in my room at Woodville – only emerging to dress (or to be dressed! as a child and leave there. I had been kindly nursed (too much so!) here, suddenly! I was nowhere – stranded!!
	However, I am getting slowly eased though still very weak – especially in legs – from severity of nervous shock, which was terrible, with great loss of blood. There are many things my right hand & arm cannot do at present, (button shirt collar, &c, &c, comb hair, hold knife to cut meat, bread, &c, or spoon for soup, to dress & undress is the trouble, and I am sure, I worry & injure & retard right arm – but cannot help it. I remain here, partly on account of its altitude (always enjoying better health here), partly kind motherly care & treatment from the widow-mistress of this hotel, who, together w. her late husband & family, I have long well-known – in my own house at Napier I should not get this!!
	Besides, the Dr. wished me to be in the way of sights – seeing people. Life. – Since I could not write (when I left Woodville), and had no heart! no desire to read! (that strange feeling came on me, w. others akin, through shock & weakness) – and my house at Napier is perfectly isolated! However I purpose going thither in (say) 2-3 weeks. This is our mid-winter season; weather fine, some days warm & sun-shiny, and I venture out. I can walk – carefully – 1 mile a day on level ground. The greatest comfort – blessing – is my being able to write! of this we were in doubt at Woodville. I have your former long letter to reply to, by-and-by – i.e. if all goes on well. My accident was a very peculiar one: at Woodville (10-12 miles beyond is a mountain – Whariti – the last S. culminating peak of the Ruahine range, and I had for yrs. been very desirous of visiting it – many tourists & others having done so, but was always prevented – mainly, owing to the shortness of my stay for Ch. duty only. In March I went to help sick Minister – took Ch. duty 3 weeks staying all the time: he was now well. I, on April 1st, fine day – (Ch. duty finished, my last there, I hired gig, & driver, & went – road in capital order, horse excellent – on returning & close to town, on good road, horse fell on side as if shot and I thrown high w. a somersault came down on right side, &c &c stunned – I thought my end was come. 
	All hands scarcely expected I should recover. Even Dr told of a stiff arm. I suffered much but this past!! still my end is not very far off. 
Good Bye My dear old friend, Kind regards to Lady Hooker, and believe me, in life and death, 
Yours affectionately,
			W. Colenso. 

“Banks’ Journal” (so kindly sent by you) was read through by me before my accident. I had brought it with me for that purpose. It was read also w. interest & delight by some of my gentlemen volunteer night watchers – during first fortnight. I gave it to one dear friend, Mr Hubert Burnett (Solicitor, Mayor, & J. P.) – and intend ordering ½ dozen copies from London shortly as gift to those others & then I will write to you more particularly about it. 
			W. Colenso
			      July 1897. 

P.S. I think I got some new plants during my short stay in Mountains – saved roughly, but I have not seen them since. 
 # 


2 August 1897
Napier, N. Zealand
August 2 1897
My very dear old Friend,
	I wrote to you a few lines on 2nd ulto. from Dannevirke in the Bush, fully intending, if I reached my house in Napier in time, to write to you more largely by this S.F. Mail closing tomorrow: but this I cannot do. However, I will do so shortly. And I write now to let Lady Hooker & you know, that I have just received three admirable photos. of her Ladyship, you, & your son Joseph. I have been struck with their beauty, & have put them up under glass, in my parlour or sitting-room, – many thanks for them. 
	You do look well in your sables. Like you I always shaved chin, but now obliged to abandon it, owing to accident in April, cannot use my right hand for such a purpose, and have a thick white chin beard instead! ––
	By this mail I send you copies of my Presidential “Address” of May 1896: I got Hector, at last, to publish it in forthcoming Vol. “Trans. N.Z. I.” not yet issued: my main reason was, having both you & Huxley prominent in it – also, “maybe” (Banks’ word!) the last song of the old dying swan! ––
	Also, a copy of my paper on 4 Ferns: hope you may approve of my descriptions: specimens of them were sent last yr. to Kew. 
	I returned to Napier a week ago, but have not since been over doorstep – very busy with long neglected business matters. I am pretty well, but weak in legs. 
	Have written to my London Booksellers, Wesley & Son, for 3 copies “Banks’ Journal”. 
	Very best respects to Lady Hooker: and love to yourself and Paganini’s disciple – the violin player of Sunningdale. 
	More anon ––
		Yours ever & ever,
			W. Colenso. 
 
13 August 1897
Napier, N. Zealand,
	August 13th, 1897. 
My very dear old Friend, 
I wrote briefly to you 10 days ago by outgoing S.F. Mail, just to let you know I had (at last), returned to my old house in Napier, – with a promise to write again early, & this I now do. Imprimis, to send you the enclosed draft for £60, to be by you used as follows: – (1) to you towards your loss in publishing “Banks’ Journal” £50: and (2) £10 for your son Joe, who so kindly sent me a copy of “Hanley Castle”, in 1894 – unless mater should prefer the same being divided between the two brothers, Joseph & Richard: this I leave to you & Lady Hooker, only settle it amicably. I could wish it were well within my power to send you more, but I cannot just now, these last few months with me having proved exceptionally heavy in matters of finance, & less coming in, with losses!
	Your full and valued letter of March 29th (which reached me at Woodville in May when I was prostrated), I have now again before me. I thank you heartily for it, – one worthy of yourself. There is much in it that is food for thought, which I should like well enough to talk over with you – but, alas! that wish is vain. I thank you much for your candid approval of my “No. 1, Tract for the Times, Sabbath Observance”; just so a few sterling men here in N.Z., men who dare to think for themselves. No doubt we (many of us) have had to re-consider and unlearn much of what we were taught in childhood & youth re Divine as well as secular things. One grand, and the chief source of error, and of much mischief during the ages, has been the belief that the Bible was in its entirety the true inspired word of God! Most surely the word of God is in the Bible, as well as in other sacred books, but the Bible is not the word of God. In a sermon I preached here in the Cathedral some time ago, I said, “I love doubters: of a truly honest doubter I have great hope; of such I may say, w. Tennyson, –
               “He fought his doubts & gathered strength. 
                He would not make his judgment blind,
                He faced the spectres of the mind
         	And laid them”: Yes, ––
	“There lives more faith in honest doubt,
	Believe me, than in half the Creeds.”
	You mention Levit. XXVII. 28,29. re. human sacrifices to Jehovah: also, your showing it to your old friend Berkeley, who said, – “that explains what has always been a puzzle to me, why Jepthah’s daughter said, – ‘Do w. me after the manner of my people.’ [I do not know of this passage ipsissima verba, but I accept it as to its meaning;] She said to her father, – “My F. if thou hast opened thy mouth unto Jehovah, do to me accordingly,” &c., l.c. And also (as I take it) is readily & truly answered by observing, (1.) All the nations of Canaan commonly used such sacrifices to their gods; (2.) The Jews, also, did the same, copying them from the first, for many generations, and that, too, to Jehovah! as in Jepthah’s case, (who, mark, is not disapproved of by the historian,) Jepthah’s deed evidently met with universal approbation, & was regarded as praise-worthy piety. And, indeed, he could not have ventured to make his vow had not human victims offered to Jehovah been deemed particularly meritorious in his time, otherwise he must have feared to provoke by it the wrath of God, rather than procure his assistance. Josephus admitted the literal truth of the story, though he naturally added, reprovingly, that Jepthah presented an offering neither lawful nor pleasing to God; in a similar manner the subject was viewed by the Talmud, and by the Father of the Church, and so, Luther – honest & clear-sighted, but harassed between his conviction and tradition of the Ch., observed in a marginal note, – “It is assumed by the Fathers that he did not sacrifice her, but the text stands clear.” Dr. Kalisch, the eminent Jewish Commentator, on this subject, says, – “One instance like that of Jepthah not only justifies but necessitates the inference of a general custom: Pious men slaughtered human victims not to Moloch nor to any other foreign deity, but to the national God Jehovah. And Jepthah is praised for his faith in the N.T. Heb: XI. 32. Indeed, David indulged in the same (2 Sam. XXI. 1-14). Moreover I have long considered Abraham’s sacrifice of Isaac as pertaining to the same class, for, rightly to understand that, we must consider how it was then with Abraham 4000 years ago – strange as it may seem to us now – the offering of the first born, almost then common, such was no moral shock only a sorrow and a trial to Abraham: true the “command” the trial was used, not to sanction but to abolish human sacrifices. It has ever seemed of importance to me, that Abraham’s deed is not made much of in the Bible, as it is, & has ever been by the Ch., but merely referred to once by James, II, 21. (3.) And as to Levit. XXVII, 28,29, – I believe that the Levitical laws, with others in the Pentateuch, were of late origin: as Dr Kalisch., also, truly remarks, – “It is not sufficient to concede that, in the time of the Judges” (Jepthah’s) the “Mosaic Law” was little known & not strictly observed: it had, at that period, absolutely not existed at all; had it existed, a God-fearing leader could not have uttered a vow cursed as an abomination in the Pentateuch; and had he uttered it, he would have been prevented by the appointed guardian, of that code from publicly executing the impious and detestable act.”And, again, it is impossible to deny that the first-born sons were frequently sacrificed – not only by idolatrous Israelites in honour of foreign gods as Moloch & Baal, but by pious men in honour of Jehovah; but the Pentateuch, the embodiment of the more enlightened & advanced race of the Hebrews, distinctly commanded the redemption of the firstborn.” Yes: Man has only gradually & slowly learned (oh! how slowly) that the only one true & living God – “Our Father in heaven” – is Love, everlasting unchangeable love, & willeth all to be saved; this glorious wholesome truth, taught by prophets (teachers & preachers) in all ages (Heb. I. 1,2) teste Jonah (sans “whale”) IV. 11; I not unfrequently repeat (sometimes in pulpit) Pope’s “Universal Prayer,”
	“Father of all in every age,
                 In every clime, adored;
                 By saint, by savage, & by sage,
                 Jehovah, Jove, or Lord.”
That “God is Love”, (a theme on which I love to dwell) was more fully & clearly shown by Jesus & his disciples: – ex. Luke XV. 1 Cor. XIII. 7, 8. 2 Cor. V. 19. James I. 5, 17: 1 John I. 9, &c, &c, &c. ––
[Re human sacrifices of Jews, see Ps. CVI. 38. Ezek. XVI. 20. 2 Chron, XXXIII,
                 1-6: also 2 Kings III. 27. Micah VI. 6-7]
––––––––––––––––––––––
But I must notice some other matters in your letter. You ask re “printing my Lexicon”, (which, however, is only that of the first letter “A”.) It is now near the end, about 100 pages printed, to which will be added a few pages of English-Maori (just to show it) and a Preface. I have been continually stirring-up the Govt. Printer, at same time the printing of it was in abeyance while I was laid aside 2-3 months at Woodville, and now, I fear the Session of Parliament being near, will cause another delay. 
You tell me of Sir G. Grey, and we are continually hearing of him – short cablegrams – up & down: very ill near death: &, anon, better. 
Re portrait of Herbert Spencer by Herkommer: I find, in “Royal Academy Pictures”, Part IV, 1897, p.145, a curious highly finished artistic portrait of him, in a Bronze bust by Onslow Ford, which may be a striking likeness, it is a very peculiar one. I have lately received from London his late Vol. “Principles of Sociology”, have cut it, but not yet found time to read it. 
I told you in a former letter my having received the copy of “Banks’ Journal” you had so kindly sent me; and I took it with me to the Bush in March – to read, and I did so, finishing just before the accident. I was most pleased with many parts of it; though, in some, I could have wished for fuller information. And I had fully intended to have something to say re same when I should write to you. But one of my early kind gentlemen volunteers – night-watchers, a Mr Burnett, (Solicitor, & Ex-Mayor of Woodville, also Minister’s Churchwarden, and the lay member in our Diocesan Synod from Wood. always a dear friend of mine, and a real good fellow,) having taken a great fancy to the book, through reading in it during the nights he was with me. (3) having also to sit up in a chair! I gave it to him on coming away, so that I cannot note and remark on passages therein, as I wished to do, and with it, I gave the pamphlet you sent me concerning what is in Australia re Banks’ correspondence, which came to hand while I was an invalid. 
You, naturally, ask, “Could not the N.Z. Govt. be persuaded to publish Banks’ letters, &c., purchased by Sir G. Grey and now in N.Z. ?” I fear not, at present. 
You will be glad to hear, that Buller has, at last! escaped from the wily schemes & traps of his enemies – the Govt. having to pay all costs! I enclose a clipping.
I suppose you are hard at work on the Ceylon Flora: I heartily wish you all success, & strength, to go on with & finish that also. By S.F. Mail this day a letter from Professor Howes re the Huxley Mem. fund, asking for my subsn. I had previously in March, received a similar one, but was laid up: and since I came back to Napier wishing to reply, I wrote to Profr. Parker, Dunedin, who had been appointed Treasurer to know if he had remitted, or would shortly do so that I might join, but no reply, yet I must find some means of sending £2.2.0. I must fear that the amount of subscription from N.Z. will be very small, though I strove hard. 
I am “improving daily” though slowly. The worst is: want of strength – power in my legs for walking; of late (4-6 weeks) I have been greatly confined to room from wet weather. Our winter too; but now, that spring is come & weather warmer, I hope to have daily exercise out of doors. I was out yesterday and again this day for 1½ hours each day walking, – but it requires a determined will to keep at it, one’s muscles seem to be so greatly degenerated – contracted, & all from that shock. 
I must not omit telling you a curious Botanical item: while confined at Woodville I heard of an indigenous “Indian Rubber Plant,” and was deemed very stupid not to have known it long ago! as it was so commonly known here among the Settlers by that name; but it was only found on the high hill ranges. By-and-by young leafy samples were brought to me, and to my surprise they were those of a Cordyline – either C. indivisa, Kunth, or (more likely) C. Hectori, Col., – perhaps this latter, and it derived its common name from the elasticity of the leaf, I saw, it could be drawn out longitudinally a few inches, and then return to its former shape & size, without apparently any rupture. In spots where the Phormium is not, & this plant is, it is used in tying up bundles. 
I have no doubt of your having shown your loyalty & devotion – but I can scarcely think you, or Lady Hooker, went purposely to London, on, or for, 22nd June; here, in N.Z., as indeed everywhere! save some parts of unhappy Ireland, there was no lack; and, as with you, in London, all went on well. I have just received from a good London friend, a bundle of “Graphics”, filled, I suppose, with pictures! no time yet to open & see. 
Our local auxiliary branch of the N.Z. Institute have held their four meetings (out of six) for ’97: of course I have not been present. The themes were – the Moon, the state of Hawke’s Bay low lying lands so calamitously flooded in April last, and how to deal with them for the future: – and bacilli & microbes in everything! I fancy the lady portion of the audience miss their usual show of mounted botanical specimens – ferns especially. 
I trust I shall not have bored you with my long & prosy letter – of all sorts. It has been a great pleasure to me to write it to you. – albeit my arm (elbow) & hand would say the contrary – memory, too, not yet having returned to its wonted set. – will it ever?
And now, my dear old and valued Friend, – once more, Good Bye!
		With much love
	I am, yours faithfully,
		W. Colenso. 
 # 


16 January 1898
Napier, N. Zealand,
June 16th 1898. 
My Very Dear & Esteemed old Friend,
	I almost fear to write – having so long delayed, and yet, every now & then, on noticing your letters in my big perennial bundle of unanswered letters, having a sharp twinge of conscience like a semi-electric shock, but, alas! soon forgotten. 
	I do not think I have written to you since August last! although I have received two letters from you – long ones, too! and full of affection a-la-Hooker one dated July 18th., and one Octr. 3, 1897; But I have sent you several Papers, from which you would learn I was still “alive & kicking”, I have been closely & continuously engaged, with not much physical strength for anything except writing; and what a blessing! to have this faculty restored!
	I have rejoiced w. you in your good fortune, as so lovingly given in your two letters: your success (richly deserved) re publication of “Banks’ Journal” – your having undertaken the finishing of the “Ceylon Flora” – your obtaining the high honour of “G.C.S.I.” (which, I trust, I duly noted in my address on Papers sent,) and when you mention your big ribbon coupled w. the name of Banks, I think on his portrait so drawn in the Journal, and then I go off, at a tangent, to you & yours here in your latest photo, (ever before me) in your “Sables”! and thence off again, in mind, to your new Court dress w. “sparkling diamonds,” & lovingly utter an Io Pæan. Another pleasing item is this, of your two sons doing well – both at Uy. & at Home. I thank you for this additional copy of “Banks’ Journal” with your name duly inscribed. I have also received 3 copies I had ordered from London as presents to my kind volunteer gentlemen night nurses, who were with me during the first 10-12 nights, expecting or fearing to see me die. I have been and am very busy, mostly in the writing way – letters, public & private; as I keep a tally of my scrawls – much like Crusoe his days on the desolate island – I find, I have written from Augt.1, to Decr.31st, – 427 letters, some very long, – witness those in “Herald”, v. Father Grogan. I am now getting them (3) together with those of Xmas.1894 (7) republished in book form w. additions – notes & appendix, the first 20pps. finally corrected yesterday. 
	Shortly before Xmas, I was surprised with a packet of “proofs” from Governt. Printer, containing my last revise of pp. with title, dedication, preface, and addendum – viz, that Governt. Paper of 1875, containing my letter re Mao. Lex. to the then Native Minister (of which I have no doubt I duly sent you a copy,) as I wish this to be preserved for a future generation. In returning the proof, I told the printer of our former Premier (Sir E. Stafford) being with you when my letter of August arrived at Sunningdale, and of your (two) remarks on letter “A”, &c., – and, that as I had dedicated the little book to Sir G. Grey (whose name had also been mentioned in the Preface & old letter), I now had hopes of a copy being ready in time for Sir George to see. Of course, the printing of my little book had been laid aside during the Session of Parliament, and I did not expect to see any proofs again so quickly. 
	I have had no holiday during Xmas. and N.Year festivals, rather more closely engaged, having no visitors, and not keeping Yule-tide. Weather very hot and dry: upstairs in my chamber, thermr. 86° (– in this cool house – owing to iron roof, below, in parlour (and work-room) 74°. I have said “no visitors”: I suppose the clergy have “cut me” for my 2 motions in the Synod: I hope you received the 2 papers I sent you containing my 2 letters re same. I have not seen any of them since the Synod (now more than 2 months ago!) there being also several strangers here, Bp. Melanesia, his Archdeacon & others, on their way to Genl. Synod at X.Ch. in February, but Rev. W. Welsh, Curate of St. Augustines in this town regularly calls once a week. He is very unwell, & has got 12 months furlough – rest & med. advice in England: he will leave in March. Mr W. & Congn. greatly wished me to be with them on 2nd inst. (first Sy in N. Year) seeing I had taken the Services there on that day during 5 successive years. So I went thither on that day, & helped in Service, reading Lesson & preaching(?) short sermon, & assisting at H.C. but got through w. difficulty being so very weak: my first visit to a Ch. since March last at Woodville – not, however, including my official attendance at Cathedral on opening of Synod. I only attended 3 days (afternoon) at Synod, taken very unwell night of 3rd. day, owing to extra and real exertion in the matter of my 2 Motions – far beyond my strength. However, being “in-for-it,” I spoke long & strong, to the astonishment of all – probably my last there. 
	I received a letter last month from a Mrs Tindell, Misperton Hall, Kirby, Pickering, Yorkshire, asking for a few spns. of Hepaticæ: the seeking them, among hundreds of little packets of spns, of Crypts stored away in boxes, gave me some days of trouble, enhanced by my right arm not being strong enough to move many things: just a few spns. go to her by this Mail: she mentioned her visit to the Crypt of Museum at Kew, & other places. (She seems to be an expert at Hepat.)
	I have also recd. such a nice letter from Lady Hooker, which I did fully intend to ansr. by this M. but find I cannot purpose doing so by an early M. And again, lately from her kind & thoughtful Ladyship a vol. of “Old London” as a Xmas. gift making me doubly ashamed. 
	My general health is pretty good, can close little finger on palm, & bring down 2nd & 3rd fingers, but not forefinger, cannot well lift a book, &c, over 2 lb., but can, now, with care, use a knife to cut food on a plate: the worst is, my powers of walking are very weak, but without pain: I walk a little outside every day – but not enough: feet & ankles swelling much – painless ?anasarca begun. 
	Here I must close. With best respects, Kindest Regards to Lady Hooker, and all good wishes for your dear family, and to yourself my dear old friend, everything good: 
Yours ever,
		W. Colenso. 

Five bush fires in these parts, during last seven days – I read in paper. 
 # 


14 February 1898 
Napier, New Zealand
July 14th, 1898
Dear Lady Hooker
At last! I am enabled to write to you and to fulfil my wish (“vow” I was going to write,) which has been ever and anon present with me for some time past: I think I alluded to this – or, went a step further and promised in my letter to your dear husband, Sir Joseph, of last month. And now for an explanation: I duly received your kind note of October (together with one from your son, Joseph, same date,) and subsequently the nice volume you so kindly & thoughtfully sent me as a Xmas gift – “Old London”, which pleasingly came to hand quite in time, – reminding me the more strongly of my being indebted to you. And my main reason for not earlier writing was my waiting for the part II of a handsome work on ancient “Maori Art,” which was delayed in issuing – as Sir James Hector says – to make it a double number: – this only came to hand from Wellington yesterday, but quite in time to send by this S.F. Mail closing on 16th. Please accept these parts; I purpose to send you the following ones completing the work, when issued. I trust they may be in some degree acceptable to you – though hardly a Ladies Book: but if not, Sir Joseph, who cannot be far away, will I dare say welcome them. 
I scarcely need write, how glad I was to hear such a good, “A.1,” report of your dear son J.S.H. – May he steadily follow on and daily acquire more & more, and ever be receiving God’s blessing, on his daily studies and labours. I must write to him, to thank him for his very kind and esteemed note. As I said in my last to Sir Joseph – I am still very busy, daily at it, mostly writing letters, also naming parcels of plants sent in to me by strangers! Which take up more of my time than they are aware of. ––
“Sunningdale” is the pretty County name of your delightful locality, and if it fulfils its name, Flora’s earliest spring flowers will be just saluting you – Primroses, Violets, Snowdrops, Jonquils, and Narcissi in rich profusion. Eh! dear me! this day (14th.) is also Valentine’s Day possibly with Mistletoe (recently with Holly gone out of fashion!) still kept up with you in the Northern clime & old Home. 
I am pretty well in general health, still slowly improving daily (stock phrase). My pamphlet v. Errors of Rome and Ritualism is still in press, advanced to 70 pages, and I hope may be published next week, when it is I intend sending a copy to Sunningdale. 
Please remember me most kindly to Sir Joseph, and receive my best respects and kind regards, and Believe me ever
	Yours most sincerely
	W. Colenso. 


Lady Hyacinth Hooker
    Sunningdale
        England
with the
    affectionate regards
        of her Ladyship’s
attached and obliged
    Old Family friend,
W. Colenso
Napier, New Zealand,
    Feby. 14th., 1898. 

 # 


1 March 1898
Napier, New Zealand
	March 1st – 1898. 
My very dear old friend
	I last wrote to you in Jany. and to Lady Hooker in Feby. with a parcel, which I hope her Ladyship may safely receive, and yesterday I also posted to you a paper containing notice of issue of my little book v. “Errors of Ch. of Rome” – fearing I may not get a copy ready for this mail. 
	And now I feel impelled to write a few lines to introduce the enclosed specimen – just now to hand (with many others, some sps novæ, & all in a sad jumble & tangle from the Ruahine Mountain range, Alpine heights. I have no time to examine it closely: indeed, I only this morning, in bed, thought of sending it to you right away! as the mail closes this night. To me it is very curious and scarcely a Lycopodium, rather a type of gen. nov., like our Phylloglossum of 50 years ago! Prima facie it reminded me of Equisetum, so that I had thought, if I should describe it, to call it L. equisitoides, or make a new genus of it. And then I remembered that, on your deleting Colensoa (putting it back to Pratia,) I had asked you, should you find some new mountain plant of ours, to name it in lieu of Colensoa: and so I determined to send you the enclosed specimen. I can give you more: some are three-branched, and one I have is four, – i.e. two branches like this sent. The capsules are axillary reniform yellow & 2-valved, as in Lycopodium but the curious additional axillary scarious & hard gaping perianth (?) or calyces? are wholly new to me. 
	Let me hear from you about same as early as convenient. I have also a dear little gem! a small Veronica from same heights, which, if new, to me, I shall describe & name V. subrosulata: I enclose specimen – anthers large orbicular purple – enclosed, cor. pure white. 
	Hope specimens may safely reach you. Trust all are well at Sunningdale. I am well, but a little over worked & confined of late. 
	Kindest remembrances. 
		W. Colenso
 # 



25 May 1898

Napier, N. Zealand
May 25th. 1898
My very Dear old Friend,
	My last to you w. specimens was on 1st March: since then I have received your kind letter of April 3rd with photo of your own self enclosed, taken, too, by your son: for both these I think you heartily. You say, you were “sitting for a medallion from which a medal is to be struck in your honour by the Linn. Socy.” – and, curiously enough, with it (same post) came a note from Treasurer “Hooker medal fund,” informing me of the progress of that work: at which I am (again) right glad! And, also, at your approval of my booklet v. Father Grogan & “Errors of Ch. of Rome.” And now (at last!!) I have something new – long promised – to send you with this, viz. my precursor specimen of Maori-English Lexicon! of which I obtained ½ doz copies a few days ago. I send you 2 of the 6 – one for you, and one for Sir G. Grey if still alive when such reaches you: if you could manage to present it yourself (provided he is still sensible), you would confer another esteemed favour: and should Grey have followed Gladstone ere this arrives, then that copy is also to be yours. I have had a deal of trouble (always so) down to the present over this little book; it was finished printing early in January but (somehow) binding delayed. The Governor, & the Premier (Seddon) were here at end of March: I saw Seddon for a short space (5-7 min.), only here for a day on his way to Auckland, and he kindly offered to cause copies to be made up and sent out to Libraries, Colleges, Societies, &c, to be named by me (my hand & elbow disliking much of that making-up-parcel work). This I did selecting 83, at Home and abroad & sent him the list. 
	After his return to Wellington, it came out, that only 550 copies were printed, and I had early ordered “500 for myself” – at same time remarking – “probably the Govt would like some copies.” And now – as Seddon wanted 150, or more, I was to be let off with 300! Several notes &c, have passed, and I, at last, (have agreed under existing circumstances to Seddon’s allocation, viz. 300 to me to include those 83 supra,) said to the Govt. printer, “Send me ½ doz. at once.” I purpose sending copies to some of our leading savans at Home, M. Müller & others, – and probably a few for sale to Trübner & Co. –
	I wish you particularly to read my “preface”, and the old Parliamentary Paper at the end. I got this printed with it to tell its own simple tale to reasonable educated men at a future day – after me. 
	There are some nice Botanical bits in the book, particularly p.49 “ao” (11): also, “ake,” p.30: –, “akerautangi,” p.31: “aute,” p.99; “aotawa,” p.53; “aouri,” p.53:-”arapaki,” p.63:”arataua,” p.64: “atea.” p.82: “atatuhi,” p.81: – “atatangirea,” p.80; “atutahi,” p.90: and “awe,” p.103: &c. – and note well, “atua,” p.87, as my plain & truthful speaking here, has been made much of against me. Many of the Maori sentences – being all pure grammatical Maori – are a mine of wealth to the linguist in Polynesian lore. I may say it to you that I do not think there is another European in N.Z. that knows half of what I have herein brought forward, – and now my memory is failing! Yet I may feel sure to have a host of yelling detractors. 
	I went inland, S. as far as Woodville, at end of April, only returning to Napier on 23rd inst. (4 wks. away) and again ascended that mountain, but to find my choice prized (new?) ferns of last year, all gone! through fires. How I lamented over them (growing by the side of cutting-track), the more, because I could not go into the still standing forest near by, legs not permitting!
	However, my month’s journeying, with a few kind friends – fine weather, &c, &c, – did me “a world of good” – enabling me to take a full share on 3 Sundays in two Churches – preaching 2 sermons on each of 2 days (Mg. & Evg. S.), and walking to & from hotel – some distance. – I am now keeping well (hating worry!) and have much, very much to be thankful for. 
	This is your lovely English month of May, and I hope you are truly enjoying it in your tusculum gardens & shrubberies: I often think on them & you – both, all. 
	Kindest regards to Lady Hooker, and best hearty wishes for your dear sons,
	
	Believe me, ever,
		Yours truly & affecty. 
			
			W. Colenso. 

 # 


 
19 June 1898

Napier, N. Zealand,
	June 19th. 1898
(late night)
My Dear old Friend
	I wrote to you on 25th ulto. sending also 2 copies of the (specimen) “Mao. Eng. Lexicon,” which I hope may duly reach you: since then I have received your kind note of April 20th, for which I thank you. 
	I should not; however, be writing to you now, only I have (two days ago) received from Government my reduced share of those Lexicon specimens – and am now sending you by this mail 2 more copies for your friends. Dr Seddon, our Premier, has kindly sent out by last S.F. Mail nearly 100 copies (free) to Brit. & For. Libraries & Societies from my list supplied to him, as I mentioned in my last, and I am now sending a lot more, and among them a copy to Prof. Max Müller with a rather long letter. (Many years ago I had a nice letter from him respecting this work, and I have never forgotten it.) And, in my letter to him, I have called his critical sagacious attention to a few items in the little book, – mentioning that I had also done so in mine to you – re a few Botanl. ones, and, if you are very friendly with Max, and should be writing to him perhaps you would say a word re your old friend. He knew my namesake of Natal very well. 
	– With very kind regards to Lady Hooker, yourself, & family. 
		Ever affy. yours. 
			W. Colenso. 

P.S. 20th. This mg. opening the big case of books, I found by mere chance! – that all had got put into each of them “with author’s compliments,” so, I suppose, none are to be sold:- Tempus revelat. 
W.C. 
 # 



30 August 1898

Waipukurau, 45
miles S. from Napier
August 30th, 1898. 
My very dear & ever Esteemed old friend,
	Your kind letter of July 4th reached me last week, and as I had to come on to this place to hold Ch. Services here last Sunday (28th) in absence of the Vicar, – and the S.F. Mail closing tonight, I brought on with me yours (& others letters) to answer from this place, as I should not get back in time. 
	Well: I have again to thank you for your very kind letter (“old style”): hope you soon had better weather, and that you and Lady Hooker, and all your family are enjoying perfect health and much happiness in your delightful Home. I am keeping pretty (or very) well: on Sunday last, I took the whole Service in the mg., and at the Evg. S. read Lessons & preached, the walking to & from both times, especially back at night, tried me a bit, owing to an attack of Rheumatism in pelvis bones & knees, but I was all right again next day: I purpose returning to Napier on Septr. 1st. – The weather of late has been delightful, particularly last Friday morning the appearance of the long extending Ruahine mountain range was transcendently lovely! the mg. was clear, frosty air the nt. before, the whole range from base to summit deeply covered with pure virgin snow, every peak and crag shown so strongly with the blue sky without a cloud: it was a ravishing sight – worth coming hither to see, & so I told some, but they could not see it: how true it is – the eye sees what the mind brings; at such seasons I feel filled in a reverential kind of awe, & generally repeat the grand old Wardensian Hymn: –
	“For the strength of the hills we bless thee,
	O God – our Fathers’ God.”
and well they might do so, as the mountains saved their remnants from the merciless slaughtering bands of Xn. Soldiers – sent by Xn. Pope. 
	Now there is a long to-do! And to you too, who have seen snow & mountains – both in the Antarctic Circle, & the Himalayas! ––
	I trust you may have seen dear old Sir George: as you truly say – it is wonderful how long he has held out – I trust free from pain. 
	I sent you a second brace, – not of pheasants, nor partridges – but of “Specimen” Lexicon. 
	I regret to have to say, that I cannot get Seddon (our Premier) to come to any reasonable terms re publishing another portion of the Lexicon, last week I again replied to his letter (an answer to mine of June & July): he offers to get printed, I writing out all the Copy (some of 8 months work) free, and also paying half the printing, and this latter I have again refused. I feel it the more, now, as many answers have come to hand from Universities, Colleges, Libraries, &c, &c, at Home & Abroad, thanking for Copy spn. sent, & urging the continuance of the work by the Govt. and I have told Seddon this: he, too, being a Camb. “Doctor,” &c. I cannot understand it, unless (as before!) the old occult malignant spirit is mole-like again working,
	I cannot write any more now. Hope you are drawing to the close in your Ceylon Botany. I have sometimes thought that you had forgotten that specimen of a Lycopodium I sent to you some 6 months back: which you said, in acknowledging, you would take to Kew – compare & report. I have withheld my small Bot. paper from our Institute waiting for it. 
	Again, my dearest friend. Good Bye: kindest regards to Lady Hooker, yourself, and all the rest. 
	Believe me ever
		Yours affecty. 
			W. Colenso. 

P.S. I send you a Newspaper to make you laugh!

 # 


 
24 September 1898
Napier, New Zealand,
	September 24th 1898. 
Mr very dear old & faithful friend. 
	I write a few lines to say: – I duly received your note from Torquay, which was a doubly sad one – your loss of your sister – “the last of your Father’s family,” must have been a trial to you: I ventured to hope you were not taken unawares by her sudden departure, and her leaving before you (the last remaining!) is a reminder to you (and to me, also, your friend, at our age) to be ready ere long to follow. I sympathize with you in your loss. 
	Yours, also, contained your sad account of Sir George Grey, so long gradually dying; and rather curiously yours reached me at ix p.m. – mail arriving here, – and the next morning, in our early paper was the account of his death: it has rightly made a little stir among us in N.Z., & causes me to think much of him. 
	I thank you for your kind and loving endeavours to see Sir George, also, for your thoughtful gift of the little vol. to Mr Christy. I have not yet had any fresh communication re Lexicon from Mr Seddon – who is very busy in their “Talking shop,” and so, am still on my oars. – I send you 2-3 papers of the day. I am keeping pretty well, though age tells. I last wrote to you on 30th Augt. I am to take the Ch. Service, mg. at Clive, 8 miles distant, on Sunday next, – the grand day of Synod opening here. My respects to Lady Hooker, and much love to you. 
	Yours ever affy. 
		W. Colenso. 
 # 


11 October 1898
Napier, N. Zealand,
	October 11th, 1898
My very dear old Friend
	I wrote to you about a fortnight ago, and I should not be again writing to you just now, were it not that I have been fighting! (Don’t start!)
	A fellow (unknown) has been writing in our N. papers, abusing our (your) friends – Huxley, Darwin, Tyndal, &c, &c, & this old man would not stand it, so, having you by my side (whether clairvoyance is true, or not.), I went to work – not sparing him. I send you copies of the papers containing our warfare to date and I find this mg. “another Rd.” is in the field tackling him nicely. 
	It was also a very busy week with me (annual Synod services) so that I have been doing double relief. Our Synod commenced on 30th. ult. I present: on 2nd Octr, I was driven to Clive 8 miles, to take Ch. duty there for Canon S. Hill, who was here in Cathedral, returning – I was at Cathedral, evg., to hear Bps. change, &c., then, during last week at all the daily afternoon sittings, 4-6, ending on Friday: since then preparing (finishing) papers – descriptions of a few plants (mostly alpine & found this year) & mounting them (for Ladies!) – this meeting last for season – was to have been held last night, but the heavy rain yesterday – first for many weeks and very welcome – caused it to be put off till next Monday: of course I do not go myself. 
At Synod I had to come out pretty severely (being the old m.!) on some of our semi-ritualistic parsons, & told one of them – he had better go to Rome: possibly my last warning voice. Though applauded in Synod, I know I have offended some of the young fry (“parsonettes”, I call them,) but then I don’t care a rap!
All this stir re Darwin, &c., has been brought about by one of our party (a talkative layman) giving a Lecture on “Geology” (save the mark!), endeavouring to bolster up the mosaic cosmogony – in the old fashion way. I was not present – & did not intend to move in the matter – but some one took him up – in Paper, and so the battle began: had not this other fellow (who signed him-self “Tadpole”,) come out with a sudden thunderbolt – “Huxley, Darwin, & Co. were, and are infidels”, I should have remained quiet, but that – I would not stand:  and I have this consolation that you are with me, and that good – “Light, more light!” – will be the ultimate result. ––
I have been keeping well: always so, I think, in a bustle; but old age tells, & I feel it. Still I have no wish to live my life over again. – Enough. 
I hope you are quite well also Lady Hooker & all yours. Daily do I look at Lady Hooker’s photo. (here w. yours) in my parlour (which is often, also, work-room for fire-place,) and – will you permit me to say? – admire it – something indescribably real – calming – soothing, I derive therefrom: how rich you are. 
Well: once more, Good Bye. Kindest respects to your good wife and same, w. additions to you. 	
Believe me ever yours 
		W. Colenso. 
(I send. 4-5 papers)

 # 


21 February 1899 from Henry Hill
Bluff Hill. 
Napier. N.Z. 
Feb 21 – 1899. 
To
    Sir Joseph Hooker KCMG
London
    Dear Sir. 
I venture to post you two newspapers containing information touching the death of the Rev Wm. Colenso FRS, FLS, etc. As he was a dear friend of my own & as he often showed to me your letters, I have deemed it my duty to write a few lines for your information. I usually saw him once or twice & when about from home he corresponded with me & told me all the town doings. I know how much he valued your friendship & also that of Lady Hooker, & your photographs were always in his sitting room. In these newspapers you will learn something of his life. My object in writing now is to tell you that having seen his will, he has left to you the sum of £500 payable to Lady Hooker should you have died before him. 
I suppose you will hear from the Executors who are good men of high probity & honour. 
Allan Cunningham’s picture, your own & a number of the valuable & personal belongings are left to me in trust for the Philosophical Society here. He has also left us £200 in money. His bequests are numerous and characterize the man. 
His loss is a serious one. To me especially it is just as we have been the closest friends for 20 years. Unfortunately I was away from Napier when he died & had not seen him for 6 days. He was then unwell but I was with him for about an hour and a quarter. 
Believe me
	Yours very Truly
		H. Hill. 

Address: – H. Hill B.A. F.G.S., 
		Inspector of Schools
	  	Napier. N.Z. 
 # 


17 April 1899 from 
R Coupland Harding
34 Boulcott Street		
Wellington 17 IV 1899
Sir J. Hooker
     Dear Sir, –
Having known for many years the intimate friendship existing between our late friend the Rev. W. Colenso and yourself, I have taken the liberty of posting to you copies of the Wellington Evening Post and of the Christchurch Press, containing tributes to his memory. I have no doubt that the Royal and Linnaean Societies will in some way place on record their appreciation of his unique services to science; if so, I would be glad to have the opportunity of seeing such. At the meeting of the 
 
Wellington Phil. Society last week, Dr. Hector paid a warm tribute to Mr. Colenso’s memory – as missionary, explorer, naturalist, and philologist – esteeming his life work in the latter branch as perhaps the greatest of all. The Society resolved to insert the latest portrait in the forthcoming Vol. of the Trans. – The first time such a thing has been done. It is as a personal and intimate friend more than as a scientific man and philosopher, that I mourn his loss. Though he had looked calmly and steadily forward to the approaching close for many years, the event came unexpectedly to himself, yet not to find him unprepared. The day before his departure he had been busy with many affairs – dictating answers to some of the letters that were accumulating, &c., and had methodically arranged his plans for the morrow. He passed away quietly in his sleep with the early dawn. Though exceedingly weak, he suffered little pain, and quite expected to recover and take up his ordinary routine – a round of steady and solid work which would have appalled many a man – less methodical – of half his years. 
Our Institute has suffered more seriously by death in the last twelve months than in any previous year. Three of our most prominent botanists have been called away: T. Kirk, John Buchanan, and Mr. Colenso; also W.M. Maskell, the leading authority on the family of Coccidae; and Mr. C. Hulke, an analytical chemist of great skill, and an ex-President. At present we do not see who, among our younger men are to fill the vacant places. 
I remain, Sir,
	Faithfully yours
		R. Coupland Harding
 # 



