1. Hector to Hooker, 31 August 1860 Hooker’s holiday and recruitment – Sullivan to procure Hooker an Aneroid – Hector’s endorsement of Cleland – Dickson encouraged to take an appointment and gain use of the Kew collections – Hooker’s liberal Botany – comments on Balfour’s work – Hooker’s rousing letter to Balfour – request to have Dickson’s Thesis published.
2. Hector to Hooker, [Undated A] A Religious View joke – Hooker should be pleased with Dickson’s Thesis – Hooker’s trust in Hector’s judgement – Hooker’s "crusade" in the Holy Land.
3. Hector to Hooker, [Undated B] Times slip regarding the Nova Scotia Gold diggings – Hector starting for Scotland – Hector broke with Windham and closed with the N.Z. colonists on Murchison's advice – Hector thanks Hooker for Kirk’s interesting letters.
4. Hector to Hooker, [Undated C] Hector’s Scotland address – North Berwick is beautiful, but has had little rain – Hooker’s letter to Balfour regarding Dickson – the California Photographs came out well and will be sent to Sir William – Hector to look for “wrinkles” in the Edinburgh Botanic Garden – will be South again by mid-September.
5. Hector to Hooker, 22 October 1861 Otago plans almost complete – Hector’s assistant to take equipment to Otago in December while Hector travels overland and visits the Australian Gold diggings – Hector procuring equipment in Edinburgh, will not return to London until November – will abandon the idea of a Lecture for the Royal Institution – asks Hooker for a spare proof of Arctic paper tabulations – has written to Reeks about Charles S. Wood, school of mines.
6. Hector to Hooker, 27 December 1861 Hector starts for London – thanks for the report by Haast – Otago contract signed – difficulty procuring pocket sextants.
7. Hector to Hooker, 20 February 1862 In Marseilles with Palliser – Cairo: comments on the desert, railway, and the possibility of a canal across the isthmus – delivered Hooker’s note to Thwaites in Ceylon – Major Skinner plans a trip for Hector through the jungle – comments on vegetation and Geology – chemical versus mechanical action – no Quartz thus no hope of Gold – decomposition of metamorphic rocks is new to Hector on a large scale – Bryson’s pressure theory – Wardian Case to England – Thwaites is strong for Darwin, will hopefully emphasise this in his Flora of Ceylon – fireflies and lizards from Thwaites for Australian acclimatisation society – a note for Huxley about fish.
8. Hector to Hooker, 9 July 1862 [Draft] Arrived Dunedin April – spent a pleasant and profitable month in examining the Gold Fields in Melbourne with Selwyn – did not see much of Dr. Muller, but enjoyed his gardens and greenhouses – Dr. Muller’s observations on distribution of species in Australia – equipment arrived at Dunedin two days before Hector – assistant Wood arrived on 5th of June – Provincial Government amenable to Hector’s wants – have built him an office, museum store and laboratory.
9. Hector to Hooker, 9 September 1862 Demand for Flora Zelandiae – importance of making Botanical Collections – Buchanan’s engagement on Hooker’s recommendation – hope to go with Buchanan to West Coast in December – Otago is nearly treeless – comments on geography – diagram of wooded districts – encloses report to Government, asks for Hooker’s help – encloses Gold Fields letter – Hector divided by work in town and travelling – Wood arrived in bad health, left for Australia – office built and staff employed – Otago coal and the Mesozoic Carboniferous period – hopefully enclose map of the Province.
10. Hector to Hooker, 27 March 1863 Encloses Alpine plants – summers’ gatherings to be sent home soon – Hector only in town for five days, to start back for the mountains tomorrow – will try to get Hooker a map.
11. Hector to Hooker, 11 May 1863 Hector’s plans for Botany please Hooker – this season harder than last for gathering Alpines, but a number of novelties have arrived – a set of dried plants and seeds with field notes and drawings by Buchanan to be sent to Hooker, with a duplicate set kept for the Provincial Museum – unique items will go to Hooker – starting for the West Coast with Buchanan, details of plans – hope to clear up some curious points in Otago’s Tertiary Geology, but not much hope for Botany.
12. Hector to Hooker, 15 October 1863 Away for five months – have not made many collections due to winter but return soon with Buchanan to do so – a new and exciting pass – headed for Dusky Bay – notes on Glacial valley formation – corroborates Lyell’s new book with Hector’s observations – back in Dunedin by end of year – Gold Fields – NZ Industrial Exhibition 1865; will attempt to secure spoils for Hooker.
13. Hector to Hooker, 16 January 1864 Return from eight-month expedition – examining Sounds since October mail – little Geological novelty, devoted to Botany – disappointed with West Coast flora, compare East – will send requested drawings of Cordyline australis, museum set of Otago woods – building Botanic reserve – Ranunculus – busy with survey, museum, Exhibition and acclimatization society.
14. Hector to Hooker, 16 February 1864 Buchanan’s notes on West Coast plants, hopefully in time for publication of Hooker’s book – NZ Exhibition: complementary Essays to be composed, one on Economic Botany – notes on letter to Owen, of which Hector has heard nothing.
15. Hector to Hooker, 18[?] March 1864 West Coast mosses – Hector writing a report of his activities for the Provincial Council – photographs of fossil plants – received back issues of the Geological Journal, comments on Tertiary erosion.
16. Hector to Hooker, 18 April 1864 Mosses enclosed, seeds and woods forthcoming – Dr. Monroe writing on Botany of Middle Island, Colenso on North Island – Hector divided NZ into five districts and four altitude zones – nomenclature and comparison of species difficult without Hooker’s book – Nat. Hist. Review and acclimatization – introduced plants taking over cut up earth on tracks to Gold Fields – comments on Haast’s fly theories – carrion Hawk – Kakapo and Kiwi bones to Sclater – Brown Coals – requests books on transport and acclimatization of plants and animals – Sullivan’s behaviour.
17. Hector to Hooker, 17 May 1864 List of East and West Coast flora – NZ Exhibition Essays: Haast, Crawford and Hector writing on Geology – Areca plant distribution – notes on Cordylines – query about Astelia – about to depart on a six week tour of the other Provinces to grandstand for NZ Exhibition – to visit Nelson Gold diggings – enclose map of Province – Herbarium work – In confidence: General Government to engage Hector as Colonial Geologist.
18. Hector to Hooker, 17 June 1864 Wandering about NZ – struck with Botanical differences between North and South – Gold discoveries stirring the North – Tertiary basins – the Native War engrosses all.
19. Hector to Hooker, 15 July 1864 Areca sapida does not occur in Otago – Munroe’s thoughts on Nelson Cordyline – Hector has enjoyed his tour and met with Dr. Knight, Colenso, Travers and Haast for the first time, gives opinions of them – Haast showed Hector proof sheets of Hooker’s Flora; it is excellent – relation of Great Lakes to Sounds of the West Coast – Hector's hopes for a permanent Geological Survey – observations of shells – return to Otago – after travelling whole of NZ, thinks South Island will be the greater Colony.
20. Hector to Hooker, 14 August 1864 Encloses rare fern – can learn nothing of Antipodes Is. – specimens from Chatham Is. – last great continental state of the Southern Hemisphere – NZ Southern Mountains and faultings – several months until transfer to Geological Survey of New Zealand – currently on the South Coast, preparing an expedition into unknown country.
21. Hector to Hooker, 17 October 1864 Exploring SE Coast for two months, have nothing to send Hooker – Weinmannia – asks Hooker for S. Hemisphere Essay or Fossil Flora Essay – requests news of the Glacier debate – Exhibition building complete, to open in two months.
22. Hector to Hooker, 15 November 1864 Essays for Exhibition – Geological map of NZ – leaving Otago and collections for Wellington – Rimu furniture wood – disagrees with Haast’s scooping theory of Glaciers – rock basin lakes – Wakatipu notes – relation of Sounds to Lakes – received Hooker’s Handbook – Lyell’s address – relation of hot dry winds in NZ and Australia – Exhibition opens in five weeks, delayed by squabbles with local Govt. – compared notes on Alpines with Haast.
23. Hector to Hooker, 18 January 1865 Exhibition is open, to great success – the Governor did not attend – lost the last of the collecting season – General Geological Survey – encloses Exhibition Catalogue.
24. Hector to Hooker, 15 February 1865 Hopes for copies of Handbook – delay of Essays on New Zealand – Exhibition now complete, comments on contents – sends Catalogue, asks Hooker to show it to Sclater – endorsement of Buller, ornithologist – asks after scientists at home working on mosses – Exhibition photographs – corrections to Hooker’s Flora.
25. Hector to Hooker, 15 March 1865 Leaves for Wellington soon – sends more complete Exhibition Catalogue – sends newspaper with notes on comparing Gold Fields – sends Buchanan’s notes on Cordyline.
26. Hector to Hooker, 17 April 1865 In Otago until close of Exhibition – will establish Colonial Museum in Wellington – Buchanan to work in N. Island or Kaikoras with Hector – Fossil Flora and Coal-bearing beds – comments on distribution of Fossil record – sent photographs of fossils.
27. Hector to Hooker, 17 May 1865 Discussion of rock basins – Hector's tilting theory – has had drawings made of Fossil Plants from NZ Exhibition, asks for Hooker's comments – extensive discussion of NZ Coal bearing Formations – Moa bones – Haast on West Coast at the new diggings – Hector to send home complete Geological map of NZ – will be in Wellington soon, trying to get NZ Exhibition specimens for Colonial Museum – asks for F.L.S., comments on F.R.S. – asks after Handbook – sends proof of Buller's essay.
28. Hector to Hooker, 24 May 1865 Letter of introduction for Mr. Douglas, Colonial Bank Manager – to visit Kew.
29. Hector to Hooker, 16 June 1865 Hector and Buchanan for F.L.S. – accidentally put F.L.S. after Colenso’s name when printing essay, asks Hooker to propose him – Fossil tracings to be named and sent to Wellington – now has complete set of drawings of all organic NZ remains – Hector’s theory of submergence – asks for books, and further copies of Flora NZ – tracing of plant found at Shag Point.
30. Hector to Hooker, 17 July 1865 Hooker to talk with Lyell and Darwin about Hector – Report on NZ Exhibition soon ready – has a head of D. giganteus – off to Wellington soon – Native affairs occupying Assembly over Geological matters – West Coast rapidly opened up by Gold discoveries – Haast in West Coast – Hector sick of town life, wants to get into the field.
31. Hector to Hooker, 18 July 1865 Commissioners for NZ Exhibition to have medals struck in London – design competition for medals – Hooker asked to judge due to his knowledge of NZ vegetation.
32. Hector to Hooker, 13 August 1865 Arrived in Wellington – staying with Mantell – Native affairs and Imperial troops – "Exeter Hall nonsense" – Hooker’s Handbook sitting undistributed in Govt. office – Museum is getting on – mosses and herbarium – Ramsay's lake basins: Hector can’t see what he is driving at – has not seen Lyell’s views on Ramsay.
33. Hector to Hooker, 13 September 1865 Govt. too busy with war to spend money on science – prepared examination of Island for Govt but they are not currently amenable – in new quarters – current state of museum and collections – Haast and the West Coast Coal Fields – Mantell put a question to the House regarding distribution of Hooker’s Flora – Lyell’s New Elements – to send fossil plants home to be worked up – Buchanan collecting in Otago – Sir. George Grey proposes a trip North – Colenso won’t travel by sea.
34. Hector to Hooker, [Undated D: after 13-9-1865] Mistake in Coal analysis tables sent to Hooker.
35. Hector to Hooker, 12 October 1865 Hardly been out of Wellington since arrival – frustration at Assembly – Home Govt Loan and Imperial troops – Native policy – Buchanan collecting but disappointed with results compared to Otago flora – Native names index to Handbook – asks after fossil tracings – Owen’s Palapteryx – Haast, West Coast Gold and geological comments compared with Otago – volume of people during Gold rushes.
36. Hector to Hooker, 12 November 1865 Death of Sir William Hooker – fossil collections – worries that the Otago museum will not be cared for properly – leaves for North by next steamer, with Buchanan – Buchanan disappointed with Wellington collections – Drymis – Weld’s Veronica – Ward’s Case for Hooker – NZ gardens, including Ludlam’s in the Hutt Valley – Lauder Lindsay, Hector’s Coals and the Royal Society.
37. Hector to Hooker, 22 April 1866 [continued 8 May 1866] At Kawau – Fellow of the Royal Society and fees – hopes Haast will succeed also – journey in the North – Geysers – Governor hopes to start a botanic garden there – University at Kawau – Araucaria cutting notes – notes on Kawau – continued from Wellington 8 May – trip to Kawhia, met Natives, travelled to Raglan – Governor overland to Waikato to meet Chiefs – the Great Thompson – to visit Taupo next summer – settling to writing – Cordylines – Haast up the Rakaia – Taxidermist – will effect Hooker’s hints about the museum.
38. Hector to Hooker, 15 June 1866 Sends Melicope and an unrecognised from Mt. Egmont – Sir. George Grey making Cordyline collection – Ward Case – excitement at Panama steamer – encourages Hooker to take round the world trip – Telegraph Cable across Cooks Straits – war – Petroleum at Taranaki – geological notes – Memo. regarding plants – Araliaceae, Melicope, tracings of fossil plants, Damaras, Cyperaciae – do not remit subscription as Govt. accounts need to be squared – staying with Sir. George.
39. Hector to Hooker, 24 June 1866 Panama route to open up NZ and Australia – Travers asks after his collections – asks Hooker to make a paper out of Hector’s fossil drawings – focus on Ferns as they are common to NZ and New South Wales – Coals: dropping Paleontological division for chemical one, discussion of Hydrous and Anhydrous divisions – Skey’s paper for R.S.E.
40. Hector to Hooker, 16 July 1866 Parliament have met but have not done anything yet due to distrust between Provinces – jokes that North to South climate is causing uncongeniality of pursuits – further papers about Petroleum and its relation to Brown Coals – Ward Case nearly ready – busy with report for General Assembly – Telegraph Cable to be laid next week.
41. Hector to Hooker, 17 August 1866 Hector’s nomination for R.S. – sends two plants – back from laying Cooks Straits Cable, shore connections on South end to be completed – Haast disappointed about R.S.
42. Hector to Hooker, 5 September 1866 Formal notice of F.R.S. – attendance required, but Hector cannot – Ward Case nearly ready – Cordylines in it, seven distinct species - Senecio rotundifolius – Moa Egg and Chick bones, with Emu for comparison.
43. Hector to Hooker, 7 September 1866 Pittosporium said to be from Tongariro – Cordyline notes – Telegraph Cable complete – can’t get a vote this year for Museum due to Provincialists fighting Centralists in the Assembly.
44. Hector to Hooker, 5 November 1866 Sends imperfect Maori Index to Handbook, duplicates to be sent to folk who know Maori for corrections – encloses publication on Coal Fields – just returned from Taranaki Petroleum beds, notes on – now headed to West Coast bush for three or four months – Buchanan to Kaikoras & Taranaki.
45. Hector to Hooker, 24 January 1867 In Nelson Mountains – discussion of classification of Geological phenomena; “we have been putting the cart before the horse” – Palaeozoic Fossils, resemblance to Vancouver Is. fossils – tell Lyell about Coals – sorry to mislead with Mt. Egmont plant – Colenso’s trouble with Cryptogams – new alpines and state of NZ Botany – discussion of Cordyline – resemblance in Flora of Cape Farewell to N. Auckland – Dwarf Weinmannia and W. racemosa – Hooker as Umpire to NZ Botanical disputes – Ward cases – Thanks Hooker for writing to Royal Society Secretary.
46. Hector to Hooker, 13 May 1867 At diggings in Greymouth – Ward Cases despatched – Buchanan has been up Kaikoras and Mt. Egmont, disappointed with both – encloses letter from Curator of Auckland Museum with query about a plant – encloses newspaper slips with notes on Hector’s journey.
47. Hector to Hooker, 8 June 1867 Hector back in Wellington after seven months – arrival of Hooker’s Handbook Pt. II, demand for more – Buchanan disappointed with Kaikora and Mt. Egmont excursions – Buchanan’s Auckland plants: Senecio or Ozothamnus? – attempting to get NZ Govt. to supply plants to Kew after those they had were destroyed – fernery to protect ferns – Lyell on Croft fell short of a theory of Hector’s on flooding of opposite hemispheres.
48. Hector to Hooker, 8 July 1867 Sir. George Grey’s Native plants at Kawau – four Ward Cases in progress for Hooker – Hector stirring up Government for Botanic Garden, have selected a reserve – asks Hooker for a note on the matter to be shown to Ministers – glad at Haast’s F.R.S.
49. Hector to Hooker, 8 August 1867 Has distributed Hooker’s parcel of Falkland Island Grass – Haast F.R.S. – sends seeds – encloses twig of a plant from Canterbury, Olearia, questions species – an interesting Coprosma – Handbook Pt. II distributed by Government, asks for a Bookseller to distribute – Ludlam to send Nikou – Hector soon to Taupo where C. indivisa is cultivated, notes on different species.
50. Hector to Hooker, 18 August 1867 Thanks Hooker for attending to F.R.S. subscription – hard winter, “storms exceeding any on record”, snow and loss of sheep, Telegraph stopped – snow and alpine plants, compares to Jackson Bay Mts. in 1862.
51. Hector to Hooker, 7 September 1867 Sends chert flakes found in cooking ovens along with Moa bones – paper to be prepared on them – disapproves of the manner of Sir. George Grey recall.
52. Hector to Hooker, 16 September 1867 Travers’ bones from cave in Collingwood, Nelson – Sir. George Grey regarding Kawau plants – asks for Hemlock seeds to cure scab in sheep.
53. Hector to Hooker, 7 October 1867 Hooker’s trip and satisfaction regarding NZ Government’s treatment of his Flora – a secret: Hooker will receive a Cabinet from a consortium of his friends – Hector busy; Moa paper not ready – to publish on Lake Basins theory – NZ printing establishments weak – Wardian cases away – Buchanan’s Senecio was Ozothamnus – Buchanan’s moss work lost through Wilson’s action – discussion of NZ Glacial Epoch – Hector North to view Gold diggings – asks after chert flakes – received Kiwis – asks after Colenso’s Maori Index, Mantell lent him a map.
54. Hector to Hooker, 27 October 1867 Hector on way to Taupo, to explore mountains – staying with brother of John Bidwill, has copy of his notes on Taupo district for comparison – Cabinet to be sent soon – discussion of Cordylines – Wellington overrun with Thistles, large sums spent to eradicate them – they are now disappearing by themselves – sends some photos of Moa and Wellington.
55. Hector to Hooker, 4 November 1867 Sent Hooker’s note regarding the Botanic Garden to Stafford – just reached Napier overland – after Thistles, new curse to the grass is Perepere acaena – a splendid garden in Napier where much planting has occurred.
56. Hector to Hooker, 7 January 1868 Four Cases of plants on the Asterope for Hooker, secured to the deck – same Bill includes Hooker’s Cabinet – Hector has been at Taupo, Ruapehu & Tongariro; discussion and diagram of Volcanic activity – Hector waylaid by work for the Medical Board, of which he is President – comments on Hooker’s British Association Presidency & chert flakes – is putting up a Maori House – demand for Handbook – Hooker’s notes on Olearia traversii.
57. Hector to Hooker, 7 February 1868 Visited new Gold Fields at Thames – visited Sinclair – Kirk’s new Barrier Island Pine – endorsement of Hutton – note on hurricane and earthquake.
58. Hector to Hooker, 1 March 1868 Successful arrival of Ward Case – encloses letter from Ludlam – Hector to escort the Duke of Edinburgh on his visit, will start for Auckland this week – Buchanan returned from South, done little in Recent Botany but has good Fossil Plants from Mesozoic Coal measures – comments on new wing of Museum and Maori House, encloses diagram.
59. Hector to Hooker, 2 April 1868 Visited Sir George Grey at Kawau, comments on plants and animals – going back again with Sir George Bowen, comments on – progress on the Ward Cases Hooker sent – Premier Stafford at Kawau, agrees with Hooker’s suggestion of the necessity of a Botanic Garden.
60. Hector to Hooker, 3 June 1868 Comments on Kawakawa Coal Field, discussion of cretaceo-tertiary series – Haast has a Museum and splendid Moas, compares Hector’s Moas – Kirk on the North Cape; a capital botanist but too critical for a new colony, discussion of Pine classifications – Duke of Edinburgh did not arrive, cost Hector his seasonal trip to Tongariro & Ruapehu – discussion of Lyell’s Principles Vol. II.
61. Hector to Hooker, 6 June 1868 Great mortality of Hooker’s Ward Case plants – a case Hector sent to Thwaites at Ceylon has failed – filling a case with potted Podocarpus & Dacrydium – stirring Sir George Grey up to procuring Native things for Hooker.
62. Hector to Hooker, 8 June 1868 Revels in Lyell’s Principles Vol. II & Darwin’s book, but sorry that Lyell has enlarged so much on N.Z. earthquakes – discussion of submergence versus elevation; diagram – asks after Seismometers.
63. Hector to Hooker, 9 July 1868 Hooker’s Writing Table – Hector busy travelling to Canterbury and preparing for start of new session, so cannot comment further on Lyell or Darwin – saw Kew specimens at Canterbury, asks after some for Wellington, offers wood samples in exchange – sorry for fate of Ward Cases to Hooker - have specimens of Tuatara, will send one to Günter.
64. Hector to Hooker, 8 August 1868 Gratified that Lyell in interested in Hector’s work – encloses memo re: Native childbirth – discussion of publication of Wellington Philosophic Society and New Zealand Institute papers, and agenda of meetings – meeting in carved Maori house – Haast unemployed, wants to work for Hector – sends sample Meteorological return.
65. Hector to Hooker, 8 September 1868 Sir George Grey has seeds for Hooker – extraordinary oceanic waves, discussion of time difference between their impact at various points – bad weather – banquet for Sir George Grey.
66. Hector to Hooker, 8 October 1868 Sends Ward Cases & answers to Native childbirth questions – N.Z. Institute flourishing – Travers on Ecconomic Botany & Alpine flora – Hector on tidal waves – sends Veronica – Native shrubs in museum – Ludlam wants Picia seeds – Domain Act passed – Mantell against Owen on Moa and Kiwis.
67. Hector to Hooker, 7 November 1868 Comments on Board to help run Colonial Museum, not the way Hooker suggests it to be done – asks for prehistoric academics to study early traces of Maori – Hector to start for the South – to marry eldest daughter of Sir David Monroe and take trip to Sydney & Melbourne – hope to try Ruapehu if Natives are quiet – encloses photo of Hector and Miss. Monroe – Celmisia – notes on Hooker’s seeds.
68. Hector to Hooker, 3 December 1868 Hector up Dun Mountains – will make note of Hooker’s Museum notes in lecture – staying with Monroe – has Travers’ son collecting – notes on acclimatisation of birds.
69. Hector to Hooker, 26 December 1868 Pleased to receive Willy – to be married in a few days – does not think Kawau would suit Willy – will enquire into Wicksteeds at Taranaki – will arrange for Willy to be met upon arrival.
70. Hector to Hooker, 3 January 1869 Rusticating after marriage – discussion of what to do when Willy arrives – [continued from 30 Jan] received Hooker’s budget – Willy not yet arrived, Haast to take care of him on arrival at Lyttelton – Wicksteeds unsuitable – enquiring into Ingles at Kaikora – influential people will be kind to Willy for Hooker’s sake – Nelson Mountains Coniferae – haul of corrals, thought extinct, sent to Alman.
71. Hector to Hooker, 12 February 1869 Willy will arrive soon – comments on Ingles – encloses note from Mrs. Wicksteed, disapproves due to frontier – Hector to Otago – encloses note from Wellington Philosophic Society – [Wicksteed’s letter attached].
72. Hector to Hooker, 22 February 1869 Willy arrived on 13th – Willy goes with Haultain on the Sturt to Whanganui – Buchanan goes also to collect Pliocene Tertiary fossils – Willy does not seem ill – Willy’s letter to Hooker – Hector for Otago – distributed Hooker’s seeds.
73. Hector to Hooker, 14 May 1869 Returned from South, found Willy in good health – decided not to put Willy on a run – comments on Willy’s favourable physical and mental state – thinks of sending Willy to Kawau with Holt for the winter – sends Vol. I of Transactions of the N.Z. Institute – discussion of Hood’s Saurian bones – Hector got Glossopteris in lower Carbonaceous beds – comments on Wardian cases – distributed Hooker’s seeds – [note from Holt attached, outlining court-martial at Kawau and proposal for boarding Willy.]
74. Hector to Hooker, 6 June 1869 Willy reports early symptoms of an attack but Hector thinks he is well – Hector thinks Willy will do no good in N.Z. – Willy to go for a cruise in the Sturt – sends Hooker Meteorological Pamphlet – Observatory almost complete – Kew collection now set out – Botanic garden doing well – addition of birds nests and eggs, an Elephant skeleton and Reptilian bones to the Museum – notes on wind worn stone.
75. Hector to Hooker, 9 July 1869 Willy is well on the Sturt – Hector’s brother-in-law dead – Buchanan painting fossils on stone – Wealden beds.
76. Hector to Hooker, 8 August 1869 Willy returned from cruise on Sturt, is well – Hector still means to send him home – sends newspaper clips to tell of N.Z. Institute activities – discussion of Earthquakes and their relation to the moon and sun – rock basins in Otago and Gold – political mess leading to exaggerated stories about the Natives.
77. Hector to Hooker, 3 September 1869 Willy back from Sturt, will not be able to leave for some months due to shipping – Hector to head South – Botanic Garden Bill passed.
78. Hector to Hooker, 3 October 1869 Willy’s health good, off again in the Sturt – Hector just returned from Canterbury, will soon start for Auckland overland and look for evidence of Gold – Ward case plants – comments on state of Botanic Garden – asks for Canadian Serviceberry (Amelanchier canadensis) – postage on Hector’s letters – notes on meeting of Philosophic Society – [note from Ludlam attached asking for Rhododendrons.]
79. Hector to Hooker, 31 October 1869 Comments on Willy – Hector’s son born – Hector soon to Taupo – comments on Haast controversy.
80. Hector to Hooker, 1 November 1869 Asks Hooker to publish an attached letter regarding glacial periods in New Zealand.
81. Hector to Hooker, 26 November 1869 Great change in Willy – Hector thanks Capt. Fairchild on Hooker’s behalf – has employed a tutor for Willy – arrival in Melbourne of wedgewood – Willy’s expenses thus far.
82. Hector to Hooker, 12 December 1869 Hector to Tongariro – Maori left Taupo – comments on Willy’s progress – [Incomplete copy].
83. Hector to Hooker, 20 January 1870 Hector returned from Taupo, comments on geology – comments on Willy – Vol. II Transaction of the N.Z. Institute – acknowledges receipt of vases and photograph of Hooker – note attached regarding plants sent by the Halcyone.
84. Hector to Hooker, 9 February 1870 Willy to London – discussion of geology and eruption of Ruapehu – Transactions of 1869 almost complete – printing catalogues and reports – English papers commenting on Maori troubles.
85. Hector to Hooker, 2 April 1870 Prospects of New Mail Route for the Colony – comments on seeds, Atlas Pines – Huxley’s circular about nude photographs of Natives – Hood’s saurians – Haast to work on survey.
86. Hector to Hooker, 30 April 1870 Exploring Colville Peninsula Gold Fields in Auckland – sends Vol. II Trans. N.Z. Institute – Kirk to explore Waikato – Atlas Pine seeds good – Hector camping in rebel country, near Te Kooti’s land – Hector’s letter re: Haast.
87. Hector to Hooker, 14 May 1870 Thanks Hooker for sending Hector’s letter regarding Haast to Geological Magazine – discussion of Haast – notes on fossil display – asks if Hector should communicate with Colenso [regarding F.R.S.].
88. Hector to Hooker, 2 June 1870 Hopes Willy has arrived – proposed gift for Captain Fairchild – Hector busy with Catalogue, comments on Haast – comments on Botanic Garden – Government wants Hector to teach science – disfavourable comments on Lauder Lindsay’s Botany of N.Z. – notes and diagram on Tongariro eruption – account of 1862 lahar – sends windworn stones.
89. Hector to Hooker, 2 July 1870 Received and distributed Hooker's seeds – does not believe Buller's rat to be the true Native Rat – Huxley's address – Hector to work on large collections of Saurian remains – news of Fairchild's new steamer, the Luna – comment on financial statement.
90. Hector to Hooker, 3 August 1870 Thoughts on Willy's return home – public loans – public lectures on Darwinism – Tongariro activity, Hector means to travel to the district – thoughts on global occurrences of phenomena previously thought to be local, e.g. Aurora Borealis; need for a register to record these occurrences – Hector's New Zealand earthquake register using the Telegraph – Museum Catalogue almost printed.
91. Hector to Hooker, 3 September 1870 Case of plants arrived – sends Travers' Photograms of NZ vegetation – sends Catalogue of Museum – comments on talk of University in Dunedin – sending exchanges to America – Kirk working in Herbarium.
92. Hector to Hooker, 1 October 1870 Received Student's Flora – asks after British plants for Herbarium – has Cordylines for Hooker – describes Botanic Gardens – jealousies have torn the University at Dunedin to bits – thanks for Notice of NZ Institute in Nature – sends Pittosporum, asks Hooker to compare Handbook – encloses new plant from small island in Wellington harbour.
93. Hector to Hooker, 29 October 1870 In Patea, where the hard fighting was two years ago – describes the geography and plant distribution – opinion of Kirk – intends trip to Ruapehu for botany and geology, describes Ruapehu and surrounds – seen Fairchild – Travers on his run, collecting – Mrs Hector delighted with photographs of Hooker and Sir Roderick.
94. Hector to Hooker, 3 December 1870 Sends early copy of Geological sketch of NZ – Hector has been away two months, has some small collections to send (Veronicas and Cordylines) – notes on Botanical Garden – the War [Franco-Prussian] absorbs all interest – Natural science collections in Paris.
95. Hector to Hooker, 2 January 1870 NZ Flax industry – posits offering prize in fibre research at London University –Glaucium luteum has flowered in Wellington – Tongariro sketches in Nature – Aurora Borealis and Australis – notes on meteor – asks Hooker to petition Vogel on behalf of Botanic Garden – notes on Botanic Garden – sends plants.
96. Hector to Hooker, 4 February 1870 Thanks for getting Tongariro sketches and Telegraph Department notice into Nature – Hector has traced the path of a meteor with the Telegraph network – encloses list of ferns – headed for West Coast Sounds with Governor and Commodore Stirling, hopes to get good dredgings – will not be able to get up Tongariro this season, but doubts the Maori are friendly – Hooker elected Honorary Member of the New Zealand Institute – New Zealand politics: "a reckless lot getting into power".
97. Hector to Hooker, 3 April 1871 Sends a letter disputing an address by Haast on Moa – trip to South with the Governor was interrupted by striking a rock in Bligh Sound – Hector's assistant drowned – Fairchild proud of his Telescope – Hector's wife at Nelson.
98. Hector to Hooker, 15 May 1871 Notes on Moa neck and feathers, relation to Kiwi feathers and Maori mats – Flax reports – sends Transactions of New Zealand Institute, Huxley no longer Honorary member – notes on Botanic Garden plantings – filling a Ward Case for Hooker – settlers have wantonly destroyed forest – Acclimatisation Society proposed to have space in Botanic Garden – Fairchild has Greenstone from Milford Sound, and a new boat (the Luna).
99. Hector to Hooker, 6 June[?] 1871 Note of introduction for William Buller, who intends to visit England.
100. Hector to Hooker, 7 July 1871 Hopes Hooker's trip to Morocco has enlivened him, opinions on sleeping rough in the bush – Hooker's arrangements regarding the flax are excellent, Hector to make Flax Exhibition during sitting of Parliament – notes on Veronicas – better able to get plants for Hooker now that the Botanic Gardens are established – Hutton back with Hector after a failed flax venture – Hector's second son born – opinions of Buller.
101. Hector to Hooker, 6 August 1871 Hector's dissatisfaction with travelling in New Zealand – N.Z. Government are encouraging planting on a large scale, asks Hooker's opinions for suitable species to put on Canterbury plains – Mrs Hector is ill from childbirth.
102. Hector to Hooker, 1 October 1871 Notes on formatting of Transactions – Flat problem: how do the Ultimate fibres adhere together? – Skey's paper on flax – new Parliament are ignorant of the use of the N.Z. Institute, there has been a row in the House – Botanical Gardens: Rhododendron gully doing well.
103. Hector to Hooker, 26 November 1871 Sending Type specimens of Phormium – Government have given Hector £200 to gather Californian tree seeds – New Zealanders are now aware of the necessity of large-scale planting – notes on cultivation – New Zealand building too many Railways – predicts education and Hector's projects will suffer when the money runs out.
104. Hector to Hooker, 19 February 1872 Commiserates with Hooker's problems with Ayrton, likens him to MacAndrew in Otago – asks after Black, who has been round the Sounds – Buchanan's drawing on stone – discussion of Institutional land endowments, such as the Science school in Christchurch – Hector has no hot house for plants – Canadian Serviceberry (Amelanchier canadensis) – Buller.
105. Hector to Hooker, 9 June 1872 Just returned from South Island – notes on plants sent to Hooker – Ludlam away in Sydney – asks after English opinion on Buller's Birds – sends Transactions of New Zealand Institute Vol. IV.
106. Hector to Hooker, 29 July 1872 Sends plant from Patea – Hector does not like the look of the Colony's financial state.
107. Hector to Hooker, 26 October 1872 Sends sympathies of New Zealand Scientists for Hooker's troubles with Ayrton, considers making official statement through New Zealand Institute – Provincial jealousies threatening Botanic Garden – Kew trees coming up well – Wellington Philosophic Society meeting weekly while Parliament is in session.
108. Hector to Hooker, [Undated E: June 1873 ?] Hector finally has seed of Cordyline indivisa for Hooker – sends Transactions of New Zealand Institute Vol. V – Hector having fossil plants photo-lithographed, notes resemblance of Jurrasic flora to Rajmahal Hills, India – Hector son and wife have had Typhoid, Mantell's wife and her niece have died – Hector overworked, has had no holiday for ten years – glad that troubles with Ayrton are over.
109. Hector to Hooker, 2 August 1873 Ludlam asks after Abyssinian Banana – Hector has obtained a glass house for ferns – trees are doing well, increase value of land by providing wind breaks – congratulations on Hooker's election as President of the Royal Society.
110. Hector to Hooker, 30 September 1873 Hector very busy – Hutton left for Professorship at Otago – Hector attempting to get through the Fossil Flora plates – Hooker to have Timber exhibits from Vienna – sends Veronicas.
111. Hector to Hooker, 8 May 1874 Hector sorry for the condition in which the Timber specimens arrived, will send another set – Hector has seeds from Professor Kellog in San Francisco – the Colonists are going in for planting, it has become a political cry – evidence for negative impact of deforestation on the environment – notes on East Cape Petroleum – sends Buchanan's flora proofs – Transactions advanced – arrival of the Challenger immanent – Kirk in bad health – glad Willie is doing well – Haultain Second Mate on the Luna.
112. Hector to Hooker, 4 July 1874 Sends Transactions of New Zealand Institute Vol. VI – Challenger in port but will not take much from New Zealand aside from what they got from the Museum – Thomson going over fossils – Dr. Berggren working with Buchanan – Hector not able to work much due to poisoned wound.
113. Hector to Hooker, 28 August 1874 Act passed on forest conservation – just got a vote to enlarge the Museum – intends to take a years' leave for England while building is in progress – notes on Brown Coals.
114. Hector to Hooker, 22 November 1874 Starting for England in a month – sending large collections in advance.
115. Hector to Hooker, 18 December 1874 Acknowledgment of case of plants.
116. Hector to Hooker, 24 December 1874 Leaving Wellington by the Howrah in February – seeds have arrived.
117. Hector to Hooker, 19 January 1875 Condolences on the death of Mrs Hooker – Hector leaving for England at end of month.
118. Hector to Hooker, 1 June 1875 Arrived in England – will visit Hooker at Kew with plants.
119. Hector to Hooker, 4 August 1875 Visited Brora Coal Field – working with Davis at the British Museum on fossils – will visit Kew when done to work on fossil plants – Mrs. Hector doing well – Hector secured lodgings close to the Museum, goes to Bristol at end of month.
120. Hector to Hooker, 17 September 1875 Bristol was dull – Hector and Mrs Hector having a jolly trip on the continent – visiting various Museums – remarks on meeting New Zealand Flax and Cabbage Trees everywhere – Geology of Switzerland similar to New Zealand.
121. Hector to Hooker, 16 October 1875 Returned from Paris – relates Mantell's comments on the loss of plants in the Ward Cases – Hector sorry for the loss of the Piceas.
122. Hector to Hooker, 9 November 1875 Visiting Wilson of the Melbourne Argus at Kent – organising collections for Philadelphia – the fate of the wood specimen labels – Berggren pleased with Hooker's offer to work at Kew.
123. Hector to Hooker, 14 December 1875 Just seen Vogel – Hector to Wales – asks Dyer to be told that Hector cannot find the fossil plant plates.
124. Hector to Hooker, 18 January 1876 Sending a collection to New Zealand – sent a memo to the A. General asking him to acknowledge the trouble Hooker has put himself to on the subject – Mrs Hector goes on the 10th, Hector very busy.
125. Hector to Hooker, 1 February 1876 Seeing Mrs Hector off so was not intending to attend the Linnean Society meeting, but will make time if there is anything urgent – Hector is not fully admitted yet – has plants for Hooker – asks to see Hooker's report on the Haast controversy.
126. Hector to Hooker, [Undated F: Late March 1876] Hector leaving for New Zealand soon – Hooker invited to dinner – Col. Stanford asks for wood specimens in Philadelphia, Hector asks Hooker for specimens – [attached note regarding plants].
127. Hector to Hooker, 3 April 1876 Asks for an invitation to the R.S. soiree for Farmer – will not be able to spare time to pack up the fossil plants, which are bound for the British Museum – comments on age of New Zealand fossils and poor quality of drawings.
128. Hector to Hooker, [Undated G, 1875?] Hector will try and visit Hooker about plants – will bring a plan of the Museum; has £1,000 to spend – Mrs Hector had a cold.
128A. Hector to Hooker, [Undated, 1875?] [Partial] Asks for guidance regarding oscillations of floras in latitude.
129. Hector to Hooker, 20 September 1876 Back in Wellington from Frisco, finds that Mantell has kept things running smoothly – sends congratulations on Hooker's remarriage – the plants have suffered greatly on the voyage – Hooker's Sumner Report has been kept in the dark.
130. Hector to Hooker, 19 October 1876 Buchanan's enclosed paper on the Mariattia should be worthy of the Linnean – Hector busy with Transactions of New Zealand Institute Vol. IX and inspecting Field Survey – Vogel goes to England, has a note from Hector to Hooker – Vogel wants to be F.R.S. – Botanic Garden funding troubles.
131. Hector to Hooker, 14 December 1876 Ward cases full but won't send them for a few months – going over the Chatham Islands and West Coast Sounds with Marquis of Normanby – Senecio perdicioides flowered for first time. 132. Hector to Hooker, 8 February 1877
Cases sent – gardens not in good order, but trees growing splendidly – hopes Hooker has seen Ludlam.
133. Hector to Hooker, 9 March 1877 Received books, will hand them over to the Philosophic Society – sends Panax, comments on – Sir David Monro has died. [Note attached from New Zealand Institute acknowledging receipt of items]
134. Hector to Hooker, 9 April 1877 Notes on plants sent – Hector approves of the working up of the Challenger collections – some magnificent fossil finds in New Zealand of late – Haast has returned to the society but no mention has been made of Hooker's Sumner report.
135. Hector to Hooker, 31 May 1877 Returned from West Coast – collecting for Hooker is more difficult than it used to be, due to increased responsibilities, less time, and lack of assistants – approves of Hooker's report on the Meteorological Committee.
136. Hector to Hooker, 29 June 1877 A number of things Hooker asks for can only be got in the extreme North and South – Hector has had a bad fever from a burst drain under his office.
137. Hector to Hooker, 23 August 1877 Congratulations on Hooker's Knighthood – Hector has made a good recovery from his fever – congratulations on Dyer's marriage to Hooker's daughter.
138. Hector to Hooker, 19 March 1878 Letter of introduction for Mr Carleton, who goes to England to apply to London University on matters relating to examinations – just closed the annual meeting of the University Senate – asks after Hooker's notes on Colorado – sent books to Mrs. Dyer.
139. Hector to Hooker, 21 June 1878 Sends Transactions of New Zealand Institute Vol. X – Kirk's paper on additions to Hooker's Handbook – Skey's paper on Mineral Waters – Buchanan's illustrations of N.Z. Grasses – Hector busy preparing for the session, has lots of Geological work to bring out, Lower Mesozoic formations – have found Glossopteris – collection of Timber specimens for Kew advances slowly.
140. Hector to Hooker, 19 July 1878 [Draft] Hector laments Hooker's retirement from Chair of Royal Society – praise for the work Hooker has done.
141. Hector to Hooker, 4 January 1879 Hector exploring the King Country between the Mokau and the Waikato – first European allowed past the Aukati since 1860 – encloses a new plant – met with Rewi Maniapoto and others and talked of the great North Railway to Auckland.
142. Hector to Hooker, 26 April 1879 Thanks Hooker for copy of lecture on plant distribution – Hooker excludes Acacia and Proteaceae when talking of New Zealand flora – Hector never completed his account of the New Zealand fossil flora, comments on – sends Botanical section of Transactions of New Zealand Institute Vol. XI.
143. Hector to Hooker, 17 February 1880 Letter of introduction for Justice Gillies.
144. Hector to Hooker, 17 July 1880 Glad Hooker is pleased with the Grasses – discussion of funding of the New Zealand Institute – Hector will keep Cordylines in mind for Hooker, takes measures to rediscover Dactylanthus.
145. Hector to Hooker, 3 December 1880 Thanks for present of "Henslow's Botany" for Hector's children – they send Hooker photographs of their botanical efforts – thanks for notice in Nature of the Government's funding cut to the New Zealand Institute – Hector arranged the New Zealand share of Exhibition in Melbourne, sends Catalogue – discussion of manufacturing industries and trade.
146. Hector to Hooker, 1 January 1881 Maori photographs for Darwin – encloses and comments on advert for Hutton's successor at Agricultural College, Christchurch.
147. Hector to Hooker, 26 March 1881 Heading for Melbourne to close NZ share of Exhibition – opinions of Kirk – sends Transactions of New Zealand Institute Vol. XIII and asks for notice in Nature – news of scientific developments – greatly pleased with Miss. North and her drawings – will send Timbers from Melbourne for Hooker – sends photographs of Sydney Exhibit.
148. Hector to Hooker, 17 July 1881 Timber specimens shipped from Melbourne to Kew – New Zealand has done well in terms of Exhibition prizes – Kirk has settled to lecturing at the Agricultural College in Christchurch.
149. Hector to Hooker, 13 August 1881 Hooker's holiday – Timber specimens – Buchanan working on new Alpines – House voted £150 for Botanical exploration of Tararua and Ruahine ranges – the usual wrangle over Departmental funds.
150. Hector to Hooker, 10 September 1881 Sends plants – sends slip of Proceedings of Wellington Philosophic Society – [encloses Buchanan's notes on Raoulia mackayi and notes on genus Raoulia.]
151. Hector to Hooker, 10 October 1881 Buchanan working on Alpines – state of Botanic Gardens – asks advice on olive trees and other plants of economic value – development of local industries – next volume of Transactions of New Zealand Institute will be strong in Botany; Hector proud – Timbers from Melbourne.
152. Hector to Hooker, 25 March 1882 Apologises for unsatisfactory state of the Timbers – Botanic Garden, Grass book and politics – encloses Botany section of Transactions of New Zealand Institute Vol. XIV.
153. Hector to Hooker, 23 April 1883 Hooker intending to undertake new edition of Handbook to Flora – Hooker's authority on NZ botany – to send Transactions of New Zealand Institute Vol. XV – Hector in the King Country.
154. Hector to Hooker, 18 May 1883 Colenso's F.R.S. endorsement – thanks for pamphlets – Ward Case well established – Hector likes young Peek.
155. Hector to Hooker, 10 July 1883 Plants by the Ionic – political pressure for Students' Flora & Botany text book.
156. Hector to Hooker, 16 November 1883 Plants by Ionic did not arrive well.
157. Hector to Hooker, 28 March 1884 Sends Botany section of Transactions of New Zealand Institute Vol. XVI – Colenso's astonishing paper – trip with Governor to Stuart Island and West Coast Sounds – plates for Botany sheets.
158. Hector to Hooker, 12 September 1884 Lefroy's F.R.S. – discussion of Cordyline species – notes on packing Ward Cases.
159. Hector to Hooker, 1 January 1885 Sends photograph of Hooker's godson Lyell – Hector has lost Cox, his right hand man – Buchanan is failing fast – Kirk's forestry position – Hector's dismay at previous inaction on conservation.
160. Hector to Hooker, 19 November 1885 Photo of Fourcraea, asks Hooker's help in identification – Buchanan retired – F.R.S. for Jervois – Haast to the Colonial Exhibition in place of Hector – Hector has had a note from Hooker's son Brian in Melbourne, asking for work.
161. Hector to Hooker, 11 September 1886 Danthonia buchanani – Buchanan lives in Dunedin now – mistake over specimens in NZ Flora, Otago Herbarium – asks Hooker not to bother Colonial Office "about that other matter".
162. Hector to Hooker, 7 February 1894 Hector likes Hooker's son Brian but is unable to help him much – Hector losing power over organisations – comments on state of the Colony – Hector's family growing up – description of Hector's house – Hector has lost the Botanic Gardens – looking forward to publication of Sir J. Banks' journal.
163. Hector to Hooker, 31 March 1898 Thanks for portrait of Hooker – sends photo of Hector – Maori Art Book – Kirk died – what to do with his Flora.
164. Hector to Hooker, 14 May 1898 Sends Kirk's unfinished Flora NZ, asks for Hooker's opinions.
165. Hector to Hooker, 18 August 1898 Agrees with Hooker's comments on Kirk's Flora – sends them on to the Government – Hector will attempt to publish Massee's work on fungi.